This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 
at http://books.google.com/ 



THE WORKS 



OF THE 



ENGLISH REFORMERS 

WiilUam ^j^ntfait, 

AND 

Soin ffivifb* 

EDITED BY 

THOMAS RUSSELL, A.M. 



^Aifipawoig irapaBt^Koa-t rets ^p«%^^ aurm Mp tou M(MtTOi Tou ' 
xvplov ijfiw¥ 'Ii}(rou Xpiorou. — ^Act. Apost x?. 26. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. I. 



PRINTED FOR EBENEZER PALMER, 
18, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON. 

MDCCCXXXI. 



B. BKNtLBT, PAINTER, ANDOVBR. 



ADVERTISEMENT. 



It was the Publisher's design, when he commenced this 
work, to have carried it to a much larger extent, and to 
have comprised the writings of all the most eminent Eng- 
lish mnd Scottish Reformers, and considerable expense was 
incurred in the preparation for that end. There appeared 
little doubt of the undertaking receiving that share of pa- 
tronage which would have encouraged him to accomplish 
it, and it is a circumstance he could not have foreseen 
which compels him to abandon the ground he first occu- 
pied to another party. He alludes to the inroads now 
being made in the publishing business by the Religious 
Tract Society. For the Committee and Trustees of that 
Society he has the greatest esteem, and he considers many 
of the tracts published -by that Society doubtless to have 
been the means of much usefulness, but he never can con- 
sider that they are pursuing their own proper course while 
they deviate to that which is an invasion of trade. Much 
is just now argued against monopoly, and most of these 
arguments will bear hard upon the present proceedings of 
that valuable Institution. 

The Publisher's object, however, in introducing this 
subject is only to account for the abandonment of his 
original design. The Religious Tract Society commenced 



Iv- 



an abridged series of the Writings of the Reformers at a 
reduced price after the announcement of his : as there was 
not room for two editions, and as it could not be expected 
that one individual could compete with the resources and 
influence of a combination, the present publisher had no 
alternative but to cease, at least for the present, the prose- 
cution of his series, and to content himself in the best man- 
ner he was able with the loss he sustained thereby. 

The three volumes published contain the Writings of 
two of the earliest Reformers of the English Church, 
William Tyndale and John Frith : they are reprinted ver- 
batim from the originals, with some additions, and are 
unabridged. 

It was intended to have prefixed, as a first volume, a 
reprint of Tyndale's Translation of the New Testament, 
with the various readings of each edition, and space was 
left for that purpose : but when it was decided to cease 
the publication of the work, of course, that idea was also 
abandoned. 

It is a source of much unpleasantness to the Publisher's 
mind to cease the work in so limited a form : this is the 
second publication which, for the same reason, he has been 
obliged to abandon, and he knows certainly that he has 
not been the only publisher who has sufi^red by the after- 
intrusion of the Religious Tract Society upon their specu- 
lations. 

18, PaJtemosUr Row, 
Sept. by 1881. 



A PROLOGUE 



WILLIAM TYNDALE, 

SHEWING THE USE OF THE SCRIPTURE WHICH 

HE WROTE BEFORE THE FIVE 

BOOKS OF MOSES. 



I\ 



ERRATA. 



Page 



30, line 21, for deed 


. read . 


. deeds 


30, 25, borne 




. born 


31, 6, song 




. sung 


32, 3, fain 




. feign 


33, 1, uto 




. unto 


34, 28, dele to 






35, 20, grecteth .... 




. grateth 


35, 31, nurtering . . . 




. murdering 


43, 35, rainistring . . . 




. ministering 


44, 9, npirituality . . 




. spiritualty 


44, 34, then 




. than 


46, 28, work 




. works 


46. 32, then 




. than 


46, 34, hands we . . . 




. hands. We 


46, 35, God. SaithPaul 


,• • 


. God, saith Paul. 


46, 35, 36, dele ** " 






47, 14, then 




. than 


55, 13, too 




. to 


56, 6, woud 




. would 


56, 9, then 




. than 


71, 8, all together . . . 




. altogether 


91. 11, verely 




. verily 


92, 13, soaking 




. sucking 


93, 29, 30, babler, bablcth . 




. babbler, babbleth 


97. 7. 11, contrarywise . 




. contrariwise 


122, 1 , recompence . . 




. recompense 


122, 24, supererogalionis 




. supererrogationis 


122, 28, ditto 




ditto 


128, -< — 9, man ward . . . 




. manward 


139, 7, rayment . . . . 




. raiment 


218, 14, or 




. of 


223. 13, happly 




. haply 


224, 3, 4, payed 




:r 


302, 5, lay 




305, 24, whipped .... 




. wiped 


339. 9, chopological . 




. tropological 


340, 13, too 




. to 


340, 20, have head . . . 




. have his head 


361, 6, whether ... 




. whither 


368, 3, mete 




. meet 


395, 24, forbade .... 




. forbad 


400, 21, over 




. ever 


403, 20, counsels .... 




. councils 


449, 7, 8, 1,3, Ryan 




. Guienne 


488, 8, nether-nother 




. neither nother 


488, 8. nether 




. neither 



CONTENTS. 



The Preface of Master fVilUam Tyndale, that he made before 

the Five Books of Moses, called Genesis 1 

^ Prologue by William Tyndale, shewing the use of the Scrip 

ture, which he wrote before the Five Books of Moses . . 6 

A Table, expounding certain words in the First Book of Moses 

called Genesis 1^ 

A Prologue into the Second Book of Moses called Exodus 16 

A Table expounding certain words of the Second Book of Ge- 
nesis 26 

A Prologue into the Third Book of Moses called Leviticus . . *i7 

An Exposition of certain words of the Fourth Book of Moses 

called Numeri 36 

The Prologue into the Fourth Book of Moses called Numeri, . 37 

A Prologue into the Fifth Book of Moses called Deuteronomy. 49 

The Prologue of the Prophet Jonas 54 

The Parable of the Wicked Mammon 83 

The Obedience of a Christian Man, and how Christian Rulers 

ought to Govern 163 

Preface to the Reader 164 

The Prologue unto the Book 197 



iv CONTENTS. 

Pace 

The Obedience of all Degrees proved by God^s word : and first 

qf Children unto their Elders 202. 

The Obedience of Wives unto their Husbands 206 

The Obedience of Servants unto their Masters 207 

The Obedience of Subjects unto Kings, Princes, and Rulers . . 208 

Agavist the Popes False Power 222 

The Office of a Father, and how he should Rule 233 

The Office of an Husband, and how he ought to Rule 235 

The Office of a Master, and how he ought to Rale 236 

The Duty of Landlords 237 

The Duty of Kings, and of the Judges and Officers 238 

Antichrist 265 

Of the Sacraments 285 

The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ 286 

Baptism ibid. 

Of Wedlock 287 

Of Order 288 

Penance 293 

Of Confession 294 

Of Contrition 298 

Satisfaction 300 

Absolution 301 

Confirmation 307 

Anoiliftg 309 

(tf Miracles and Worshipping of Saints 321 

Of Prayer 331 

The Four Senses of the Scripture 339 

A compendious Rehearsal of that which goeth before 366 

The Practice of Prelates 381 

Preface to the Reader 383 

Prelates appointed to Preach Christ, may not leave God's word, 
and minister Temporal Offices ; but ought to teach the lay 
People the Right Way, and let them alone with all Tem- 
poral Business 393 



CONTENTS. vii 

Page 

Peter was not greater than the other Apostles, by any Authority 

given him of Christ 395 

How the Gospel punishes Trespassers, and how by the Gospel 

we ought to go to Law with our Adversaries 398 

fVhat Officers the Apostles ordained in ChrisVs Church, and 

what their Officers were to do 400 

By what means the Prelates fell from Christ 402 

How the Bishop of Rome became greater than other, and called 

himself Pope . . 404 

By what means the Pope invaded the Empire 406 

A proper Similitude to describe our Holy Father :.... 416 

How the Pope receiveth his Kingdom of the Devil, and how he 

distributeih it again 420 

How the Pope made him a Law, and why 424 

How the Pope corrupeth the Scripture, and why 426 

How they prove all their general Councils 434 

An Example of Practice out of our Chronicles 439 

By what craft the Pope keepeth the Emperor down 444 

The Practice of our Time 452 

The cause of all that we have suffered these Twenty Years . . 455 

Why the King's Sister was turned unto France 456 

The Cause of the Journey to Cahis 458 

How the Emperor came through England 460 

Why the Queen must be Divorced 463 

Of the Divorcement 466 

By what Means the Divorcement should cost the Realm 478 

The putting down of the Cardinal 480 

What the Cause of all tfiis Mischief is 483 

Notes 493 



THE PREFACE OF MASTER WILLIAM TYNDALE, 

THAT HE MADE BEFORE THE FIVE BOOKS OF 

MOSES, CALLED GENESIS. 

ANN. Vm. JAN. 17- 



WHEN I had translated the New Testament, I added 
an Epistle unto the latter end, in which I desired them
that were learned to amend if ought were found amiss. But 
our malicious and wily hypocrites, which are so stubborn, 
and hard hearted in their wicked abominations, that it is not
possible for them to amend any thing at all (as we see by
daily experience, when both their lyings and doings are re-
buked with the truth) say, some of them, that it is impossible
to translate the Scripture into English ; some that it is not
lawful for the lay people to have it in their mother tongue ;
some that it would make them all heretics ; as it would no
doubt from many things which they of long time have false-
ly taught ; and that is the whole cause wherefore they forbid
it, though they other cloaks pretend. And some, or rather
every one, say that it would make them rise against the king, 
whom they themselves (unto their damnation) never yet 
obeyed. And lest the temporal rulers should see their false- 
hood, if the Scripture came to light, causeth them so to lie. 
And as for my translation, in which they affirm unto 
the lay people, (as I have heard say) to be I wot not how
many thousand heresies, so that it cannot be mended or

VOL. II. B 



PROLOGUES TO THE 



[Tyndale 



with Tj-n- 
dalp^iTrnn^ 
sliition of 
tbe Saw 



TUe PHpista 
ilmaicMl not 
to wrest 
ilie Scrip- 
lures. 



The Pa- 
pjista hare 
wrought 
wonder- 
fully to 

pressed tlio 
Scriptutcs. 



Ai DWti 

tlie bri^lit* 
ness of tbe 
djiy, HO 
emnoot the 
Papists 
shidc the 
light of the 
f ospcL 



correct, they have yet taken so great pain to examine it, 
and to compare it unto that they would fain have it, and 
to their own imaginations and juggling terms, and to have 
somewhat to rail at; and, under that cloak, to blaspheme 
the truth, that they might with as little labour (as I sup- 
pose) have translated the most part of the Bible. For 
they which in times past were wont to look on no more 
Scripture than they found in their Duns or such like 
devilish doctrine, have yet now so narrowly looked on my 
Translation, that there is not so much as one i therein, 
if it lack a tittle over his head, but they have noted it, 
and number it unto the ignorant people for an heresy. 
Finally, in this they be all agreed, — to drive you from the 
knowledge of the Scripture, and that ye shall not have the 
text thereof in the mother tongue ; and to keep the world 
still in darkness, to the intent they might sit in the con- 
sciences of the people, through vain superstition and false 
doctrine ; to satisfy their filthy lusts, their proud am- 
bition, and unsatiable covetousness ; and to exalt their 
own honour above king and emperor, yea, and above 
God himself. 

A thousand books had they lever to be put forth against 
their abominable doings and doctrine, than that the Scrip- 
ture should come to light. For as long as they may keep 
that down, they will so darken the right way with the mist 
of their sophistry, and so tangle them that either rebuke 
or despise their abominations, with arguments of philo- 
sophy, and with worldly similitudes and apparent reasons 
of natural wisdom ; and with wresting the Scripture unto 
their own purpose, clean contrary unto the process, order, 
and meaning of the text ; and so delude them in descant- 
ing upon it with allegories; and amaze them, expounding 
it in many senses before the unlearned lay people, (when 
it hath but one simple, literal sense, whose light the owls 
cannot abide) that though thou feel in thine heart, and art 
sure, how that all is false that they say, yet coulst thou- 
not solve their subtle riddles. 






Tyndale,] 



FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES. 



Which thing only moved me to translate the New Tes- 
tament. Because I had perceived by experience, how that 
it was impossible to establish the lay people in any truth ex- 
cept the Scripture were plainly laid before their eyes in their 
mother tongue, that they might see the process, order, and 
meaning of the text : for else, whatsoever truth is taught 
them, these enemies of all truth quench it again, partly with 
the smoke of their bottomless pit, whereof thou readest in 
Apocalypse chap. ix. that is, with apparent reasons of so- 
phistry, and traditions of their own making, founded without 
ground of Scripture, and partly in juggling with the text, 
expounding it in such a sense as is impossible to gather of 
the text, if thou see the process, order, and meaning thereof. 

And even in the bishop of London's house I intended to 
have done it. For when I was so turmoiled in the country 
where I was, that I could no longer dwell there, (the pro- 
cess whereof were too long here to rehearse) I this wise 
thought in myself— this I suffer because the priests of the 
country be unlearned, as God knoweth, there are a full ig- 
norant sort which have seen no more Latin than that they 
read in their Portesses and Missals, which yet many of them 
can scarcely read, (except it be Albertus de Secretis Mu- 
lierum, in which yet, though they be never so sorrily learn- 
ed, they pore day and night, and make notes therein, and 
all to teach the midwives as they say ; and Linwode, a book 
of constitutions to gather tythes, mortuaries, offerings, cus- 
toms, and other pillage which they call not theirs, but God's 
part, and the duty of holy church to discharge their con- 
sciences withah for they are bound that they shall not 
diminish, but encrease all things unto the uttermost of their 
powers) and, therefore, (because they are thus unlearned, 
thought I,) when they come together to the ale-house, which 
is their preaching place, they affirm that my sayings are he- 
resy. And besides that, they add to of their own heads 
which I never spake, as the manner is, to prolong the tale 
to short the time withal, and accused me secretly to the 
chancellor, and other the bishop's officers. And, indeed, 

B 1 



Whit flm 
moF^d W, 
Tyndak Co 

the Scrip- 
inn \qXa 
Englitb. 



Till* Bl- 

(illOp of 

Lnntlori 
wui then 
Tonvtall, 
which 

nfOur- 
liaiu. 



T!ic Pope'i 
rliA^iiain'a 
ptil^hit ii tUe 
alcboiiac. 



PROLOGUES TO THE 



[TYNDALE. 



Christ's 
apostles did 
nieekly ad- 
inonishybut 
the Pope's 
sectaries 
briiwl and 
scold. 



Partiality 
sometimes 
in men of 
great Icaro- 
ing. 



How Tyn- 
dale was 
deceired. 



Tyndale 
could get 
no plucc in 
the Bishop 
of Lon- 
don's 
house. 



when I came before the chancellor, he threatened me 
grievously, and reviled me, and rated me as though I had 
been a dog, and laid to my charge whereof there could be 
none accuser brought forth (as their manner is not to bring 
forth the accuser) and yet all the priests of the country were 
the same day there. 

As I this thought, the bishop of London came to my 
remembrance, whom Erasmus (whose tongue maketh of 
little gnats great elephants, and lifteth up above the stars 
whosoever giveth him a little exhibition) praiseth exceeding- 
ly, among other in his Annotations on the New Testament, 
for his great learning. Then, thought I, if I might come 
to this man's service, I were happy. And so I gat me to 
London, and, through the acquaintance of my master, came 
to sir Harry Gilford, the king's grace's comptroller, and 
brought him an Oration oflsocrates, which I had translated 
out of Greek into English, and desired him to speak unto 
my lord of London for me, which he also did as he shewed 
me, and willed me to write an epistle to my lord, and to 
go to him myself, which I also did, and delivered my epistle 
to a servant of his own, one William Hebilthwayte, a man 
of mine old acquaintance. But God (which knoweth what 
is within hypocrites) saw that I was beguiled, and that that 
counsel was not the next way unto my purpose. And 
therefore he gat me no favour in my lord's sight. 

Whereupon my lord answered me, his house was full, he 
had more than he could well find, and advised me to seek 
in London, where he said I could not lack a service. And 
so in London I abode almost a year, and marked the course 
of the world, and heard our praters, I would say our 
preachers, how they boasted themselves and their high au- 
thority ; and beheld the pomp of our prelates, and how busy 
they were, as they yet are, to set peace and unity in the 
world (though it be not possible for them that walk in 
darkness to continue long in peace, for they cannot but 
either stumble or dash themselves at one thing or another 
that shall clean unquiet all together) and saw things where- 



Tyndale] FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES. 

of I defer to speak at this time, and understood at the last 
not only that there was no room in my lord of London's 
palace to translate the New Testament, but also that there 
was no place to do it in all England, as experience doth 
now openly declare. 

Under what manner, therefore, should I now submit this 
book to be corrected and amended of them, which can 
suffer nothing to be well ? Or what protestation should I 
make in such a matter unto our prelates, those stubborn 
Nimrods which so mightily fight against God, and resist 
his Holy Spirit, enforcing with all craft and subtlety to 
quench the light of the everlasting Testament, promises, 
and appointment made between God and us ? and heaping 
the fierce wrath of God upon all princes and rulers ; mock- 
ing them with false feigned names of hypocrisy, and serv- 
ing their lusts at all points, and dispensing with them even 
of the very laws of God, of which Christ himself testifieth, 
Matt. V. " That not so much as one tittle thereof may 
perish, or be broken." And of which the propliet saith, 
Psalm cxviii, "Thou hast commanded thy laws to be 
kept" meod, that is in Hebrew, exceedingly, with all 
diligence, might, and power; and have made them so 
mad with their juggling charms, and crafty persuasions, 
that they think it a full satisfaction for all their wicked 
lying to torment such as tell them truth, and to burn the 
word of their soul's health, and slay whosoever believe 
thereon. 

Notwithstanding, yet I submit this book, and all other 
that I have either made or translated, or shall in time to 
come, (if it be God's will that I shall further labour in 
his harvest,) unto all them that submit themselves unto the 
word of God, to be corrected of them ; yea, and more- 
over to be disallowed and also burnt, if it seem worthy, 
when they have examined it with the Hebrew, so that they 
first put forth of their own translating another that is more 
correct. 



Hoom 
rtioiig^K iti 
my li>rd « 
house for 
M ly chet*p, 
biiC ni)n(!4o 
CMriHlntf! 

IVstajncuL 



TyiirlAlo'* 
is to aH 

such Hi 

Bu bill it 
tliemiM?)v<:a 
to God. 






PROLOGUES TO THE 



[Tyndale. 



A PROLOGUE BY WILLIAM TYNDALE, 

SHEWING THE USE OF THE SCRIPTURE. WHICH 

HE WROTE BEFORE THE FIVE 

BOOKS OF MOSES. 



Not the 
tong:ue bat 
the life 
proveth a 
true gos- 
peller. 



The tniest 
touchstone 
of relinon 
is Christ's 
gospel. 



'PHOUGH a man had a precious jewel, and a rich, yet 
if he wist not the value thereof, nor wherefore it 
served, he were neither the better nor richer of a straw. 
Even so though we read the Scripture, and babble of it 
never so much, yet if we know not the use of it, and 
wherefore it was given, and what is therein to be sought, 
it proiiteth us nothing at all. It is not enough, therefore, 
to read and talk of it only, but we must also desire God, 
day and night, instantly to open onr eyes, and to make us 
understand and feel wherefore the Scripture was given> 
that we may apply the medicine of the Scripture, every 
man to his own sores ; unless then we intend to be idle 
disputers, and brawlers about vain words, ever gnawing 
upon the bitter bark without, and never attaining unto the 
sweet pith within ; and persecuting one another in de- 
fending of lewd imaginations, and phantasies of our own 
invention. 

Paul, in the iii** of the second Epistle to Timothy, saith, 
*' that the Scripture is good to teach," (for that ought men 
to teach, and not dreams of their own making, as the 
Pope doth,) '* and also to improve ; " for the Scripture is 
the touch-stone that trieth all doctrines, and by that we 
know the false from the true. And in the vi^ to the 
Ephesians he calleth it '* the sword of the Spirit," because 
it killeth hypocrites, and uttereth and improveth their 



TTSDAt*,] FIV^. BOOKS OF MOSES, 

false inventions. Ami iti the xv**' to the Romans he saith, 
** All that are written, are written for our learning; that 
we, through patience and comfort of the Scripture, might 
have hope/* That is, the en samples tliat are in the Scrip- 
lure comfbrt us in all our tribulations, and make us to 
put our trust in God^ and patiently to abide his leisure. 
And in llie 10th of the first to the Corintliians, he bringeth 
in examples of the Scripture to fear us, and to bridle the 
ilesh^ that we cast not the yoke of the hiw of God from 
off our necks, and fall to lusting and doing of evih 

So now the Scripture is a light, and shewetli as the 
true way both wbat to do and what to hope for* And a 
defence from all error, and a comfort in adversity that we 
deipair not^ and fearetli us tn prosperity, that we ^ii not. 
Seek therefore in the Scripture, as thou readest itJiirst the 
law, wliat GihI CfMomandelh us to do ; and secondarilyi 
the promises, which God promiseth us again, namely in 
Christ Jesus our Lord, Then seek ensample^, first of 
comfort, how God purgeth all them that submit them- 
■elves to walk in his ways, in the purgatory of tribulation^ 
deUveriiig them yet at the latter end, and never suffering 
inyof them to perish that cleave fast to his promtseii. And, 
linally, note the eosamples which are written, to fear the 
flesh, that we sin not r that is, how God suffereth the 
ungodly and wicked sinners tliat resist God, and refuse 
loti^llow him, to continue in their wickedness; ever wax- 
ing wor*je and worse, until their sin be so sore increased, 
and so abominable, that if tliey should longer endure tliey 
would corrupt die very elect. But for the elect's sake 
God iendeth them preachers. Nevertheless, they harden 
tlieir hearts against the truth, and God destroyeth them 
utterly, and begiuntth tbe world anew. 

This comfort shall thou evennore find in the plain text 
and literal sense. Neither is there any story so homely, 
»o rude, yea, or so vile, (as it seemeth outward) wherein is 
Dot exceeding great comfort. And when some, which 
iceiti bi themselves great clerks, say, They wot not what 



The Scrip- 
ture of God 
b the It word 
of ctie 
Spirit, 



Tribuln- 
tiOD IB Ihe 
gift of God. 



Wliat xn^ 

DDgtit lo 

scelt iti tbe 
Script urva* 



Agt!>odlf 



Ensampks 
r-f theii- 

tu bo Idea 
ii«, bill to 
ff fir 111 
froDi dn 

«fi(] i]e9[i€' 
rntivti' 



How wo 

ottglit to 

to tbe 
ttie Scrip- 



PROLOGUES TO THE [Ty?*iwlk, 

more profit is in many gests of the Scripture^ if they be 
read viithout an allegory, than in a tale of Hob] n hood : 
say thou, diat they were writleii for our consolation and 
comfort^ that we dei^pair not, if auch like happen unto us. 
We be not holier Uian Noah, though he were once drunk : 
neither better beloved than Jacob, though his own son de- 
filed his bed. We be not holier than Lot, though his 
daughters tlirotigh ignorance deceived hina ; nor^ perad- 
venture, holier than those daughters. Neither are we 
holier than David, tliough he brake wedlock, and upon 
the same committed abominable murder. All those men 
have witness of the Scripture that they pleased God, mit\ 
were good men, both before that those things chanced ihem, 
and al^o after. Nevertheless sucli things hap|>ened them 
for our ensample : not that we should counterfeit tlieir 
evil ; but if while we fight willi ourselves, enforcing to 
walk in the law of God, as tliey did, we yet fall likewise, 
^at we despair not, but come again to the laws of God, 
and take better hold. 

We read, since the time of Christ's death, of virgins 
that have been brought unto the common stews, and there 
defiled ; and of martyrs that have been bound, and whores 
have abused their bodies. Why? The judgments of 
God are bottomless. Such things chanced partly for 
ensamples; partly, God through sin healeth sin. Pride 
can neither be liealed, nor yet appear, but through such 
horrible deeds, Peradventuie they were of the Pope's 
sect, and rejoiced fleshly, tl unking that heaven came by 
deeds, and not by Christ; and that tlie outward deed 
justified them and made them holy, and not the in\iard 
spirit receivetl by fuitli, and the consent of heart unto the 
law of Goth 

As tlrou readest, therefore, think that every syllable 
pertaineth to thine own self, and suck out tlie pith of the 
Scripture, and arm thyself against all assaults. First 
note with strong failh the power of God, in creating all of 
nought^ then mark llic grievous fall of Adam, and of us 



TTJiDAl^i!.] 



nVE BOOKS OF MOSES. 



all ill him I through the light regarding of the commandment 
of God< III the iv"' chapter God tun^elh hini unto Abel, 
and tben to his offerings but not to Cain and Iw o^ering : 
where thou seest tliai though the deeds of tlie evil ap|>eHr 
outA^'ardly as glorious as the deeds of the good * yet in the 
sight of Godj TAhich looketh on the heiirt, the deed is good 
becauie of the man, and not the man gtyod because of his 
deed. In the vi*?" God sendeth Noah to preach to the 
wicked, and giveth them space to repent : they wax hartl 
iiearted, God bringelh them to nought^ and yet savetli 
Ncmh; even by the same water by which he destroyed 
them. Mark also what followed the pride of the building 
of the tower of Babel. 

Consider how God sendetJi forth Abraham out of his 
own country into a strange Land, full of wicked people, 
and gave him but a bare promise witli him that would bless 
him and defend liim, j^hraha nj believed ^ and that word 
jiaved and delivered him in all perils: so that we see 
how that man's life is not,maintain€d_by breidiiij^ (a^ 
Christ saith) but mudi^j^theiLiiy Itdi evjiig the promises of 
€ML Behold how soberly, and how circumspectly, both 
Abraliam and also Isaac behave themselves among the 
infidels* Abraham buyeth that which might have been 
^iven him for nought, to cut off occasions* Isaac, when 
im wells, which he had digged, were taken from him^ 
giveth room and resiateth not. Moreover, they ear and 
«0W, and feed their cattle, and make confederations, and 
take perpetual truce, and do all outward things; even as 
they do which have no Mth, for God hath not made us to 
be idle in this worUl, i_Every man must work godly and 
truly to the ullennosit of the jwwer that God hadi given 
him ; and yet not trust ttierein, but in God*s word or 
promise, and God will work with us, and bring that we 
lio to good effect : and then, when our poweiu^ill extend 
no further, God's promises will work all alone, • 

How many things also resisted the promises of God to 
Jacob f Ami yet Jacob conjurtah Got! with his own 



FalUi our 

aiircst 

ait as^ulU^ 



Wc may 

not truHt in 
our wiirk?, 
bttt JD tlic 
word and 
promise of 
God, 

God bur- 
tlit'tied witb 
Hip i>ro- 

mise 



10 



Tbe Holy 

brcaketli 
wliefe and 
wbea U 

pteateth 



Conscience 
of evil 
doing* 
Sudelh out 



PROLOGUES TO THE [TyiroAti. 

proiiiisesi saying, *' O God of my father Abraham, antl 
God of mv father Isaac ! Oh, Lord ! wliicli saidebt unto 
me, Retuni unto thine own country, and unto the place 
where thou wast boni, and I Mill do thee good ; I am not 
wortliy of \he kast of tliose mercies ^ nor of that truth 
which thou hast done to diy servant* I went out with a 
staii^ and come home with two droves : deliver me out of 
the hands of my brother Esau, for 1 fear him greatly,** Sic- 
And God delivered him, and ^"^ill likewise all diat call 
unto lij!^ promises vviili a repenting heart, were they never 
so great dinners. Mark aho the weak intintiities of the 
man* He lovelh one wife more than another, one son 
more than another* And see how God purgeth him* 
Esau threatenelh him ; Lab an beguiletli him ; the beloved 
wife is long barren j his daughter is ravished ; his wife is 
defiled J and that of his own son* Rachel diedi, Joseph is 
taken away, yea^ and, as he supposed, rent of wild beasts. 
And yet how glorious was his end \ Note the weakness 
of his children, yea and the sin of them, and how God 
through their own wickedness saved them* These en- 
samples leach us, that a man is not at once perfect ilie first 
day he beginnelh to live well. They that be strong, tliere- 
fore, must suffer with the weak, and help to keep them in 
unity and peace, one with anoUier, until they be strongert 

Note what the brethren said when they were [attached 
and arrested] in Egypt : *' We have verily sinned (said 
they) against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his 
Boul when he besouglit us, and would not hear him ; and 
therefore is this tribulation come upon us.*' By which 
ensample thou seest how that conscience of evil doings 
fiudeth men out at last* But namely, in tribulation and 
adversity ; there temptation, and also desperation, yea, 
and the very pains of hell, find tis out : there the soul 
feeleth the fierce wrath of God, and wishetli mountains 
to fall on her, and to hide her (if it were possible) from 
the angry face of God. 

Mark, also, how great evils follow of how little au 



Tyndale.J five books OF MOSES. 11 

occasion. Dinali goeth but forth alone to see the 
daughters of the country, and how great mischief and 
trouble followed ! Jacob loved but one son more than 
another^^nd how grievous murder followed in their 
hearts ! | These are examples for our learning, to teach Of small 
us to walk warily and circumspectly in the warld of weak do*ri»c"* 
people, that we give no man occasions of eviLJ gJ^eat evils. 

Finally, see what God promised Joseph in his dreams. 
Those promises accompanied him always, and went down 
with him even into the deep dungeon, and brought him 
up again, and never forsook him till all that was promised 
was fulfilled. These are ensamples written for our learn- Ensaniples 
ing, (as Paul saith) to teach us to trust in God in the t°^ ^^ 
strong fire Ipf tribulation, and purgatory of our flesh. 
And that I they which submit themselves to follow God, 
should note and mark such things ; for their learning and 
comfort is the fruit of the Scripture, and cause why it was 
written. And with such a purpose to read it, is the way 
to everlasdng life, and to those joyful blessings that are 
promised unto all nations in the seed of Abraham, which 
seed is Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be honour and 
praise for ever, and unto God our Father through him. 
Amen. I 






12 PROLOGUES TO THE [Ttndalk. 



A TABLE, 

EXPOUNDING CERTAIN WORDS IN THE FIRST BOOK OF 
MOSES CALLED GENESIS. 



A BRECH. Tender father ; or, as some will, bow the 
knee. 

Ark. a ship made flat, as it were a chest, or a coffer. 

BissE. Fine white, whether it be silk or linen. 

Bless. God's blessings are his gifts : as in the first 
chapter he blessed them, saying, ** Grow and multiply, 
and have dominion," &c. And in the ninth chapter 
he blessed Noah and his sons, and gave them dominion 
over all beasts, and authority to eat them. And God 
blessed Abraham with cattle, and other riches. And 
Jacob desired Esau to receive the blessing which he 
brought him, that is the present and gift. God blessed the 
seventh day ; that is, gave it a pre-eminence, that men 
should rest therein from bodily labour, and learn to know 
the will of God and his laws, and how to work their works 
godly all the week after. God also blesseth all nations in 
Abraham's seed ; that is, he tumeth his love and favour 
unto them, and giveth them his Spirit and knowledge of 
the true way, and lust and power to walk therein, and all 
for Christ's sake, Abraham's son. 

Cain. So is it written in Hebrew. Notwithstanding, 
whether we call him Cain^ or Cairn, it maketh no matter, 
so we understand the meaning. Every land hath his 
manner: that we call John, the Welshmen call Euan, 
the Dutch Haunce. Such difference is between the 
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin ; and that maketh them that 



Tyndalb.] five books OF MOSES. 13 

translate out of the Hebrew vary in names from tliem that 
translate out of Latin or Greek. 

Curse. God's curse is the taking away of his benefits. 
As God cursed the earth and made it barren. So now 
hunger, dearth, war, pestilence, and such like, are yet 
right curses and signs of the wrath of God unto the unbe- 
lievers ; but unto them that know Christ they are very 
blessings, and that wholesome cross, and true purgatory 
of our flesh, through which all must go that will live 
godly and be saved : as thou readest Matt. v. '' Blessed 
are they that suffer persecution for righteousness' sake," &c. 
And Heb. xi. " The Lord chastiseth whom he loveth ; 
and scourgeth all the children that he receiveth." 

Eden. Pleasure. 

Firmament. The sky. 

Faith, is the believing of God's promises, and a sure 
trust in the goodness and truth of God. Which faith jus- 
tified Abraham, (Gen xv.) and was the mother of all his 
good works which he afterwards did. For faith is the 
goodness of all works in the sight of God. Good works 
are things of God's commandment wrought in faith. And 
to sew a shoe at the commandment of God, to do thy 
neighbour service withal, with faith to be saved by Christ, 
(as God promiseth us) is much better than to build an 
abbey of thine own imagination, trusting to be saved by 
the feigned works of hypocrites. Jacob robbed Laban 
hi& uncle ; Moses robbed the Egyptians ; and Abraham 
is about to slay and bum his own son ; and all are holy 
works, because they are wrought in faith at God's com- 
mandment. To steal, rob, and murder, are no holy 
works before worldly people, but unto them that have 
their trust in God : they are holy when God commandeth 
them. What God commandeth not, getteth no reward 
with God. Holy works of men's imaginations receive 
their reward here, as Christ testifieth, Matt. vi. Howbeit, 
of faith and works I have spoken abundantly in Mammon. 
Let him that desireth more, seek there. 



14 PROLOGUES TO THE [Tyndalr. 

Grace. Favour: as Noah found grace; that is to 
say, found favour and love. 

Ham and Cam all one. 

Jehovah, is God's name; neither is any creature so 
called ; and it is as much to say, as one that is of himself, 
and dependeth of nothing. Moreover, as oft as thou seest 
LORD in great letters, (except there be any error in the 
Iiirinting) it is in Hebrew Jehovah^ thou that art, or he that is. 

Marshal. In Hebrew he is called Sartabaim: as 
thou wouldest say. Lord of the slaughtermen. And though 
that Tabaim be taken for cooks in many places, (for the 
cooks did slay the beasts themselves in those days,) yet it 
may be taken for t^em that put men to execution also. 
And that I thought it should here best signify, inasmuch 
as he had the oversight of the king's prison, and the king's 
prisoners were they never so great men were under 
his custody : and therefore I call him chief Marshal ; an 
officer, as is the lieutenant of the Tower, or master of the 
Marshalsea. 

Slime was their mortar, xith chapter: and slime-pits, 
xivth chapter. That slime was a fatness that oosed out of 
the earth, like unto tar ; and thou mayest call it cement if 
thou wilt. 

SiLOH. After some, is as much to say as sent ; and 
after some, happy ; and after some, it signifieth Messias ; 
that is to say, anointed, and that we call Christ after the 
Greek word. And it is a prophecy of Christ ; for after all 
the other tribes were in captivity, and their kingdom de- 
stroyed, yet the tribe .of Judah had a ruler of the same 
blood, even unto the coming of Christ : and about the 
coming of Christ the Romans conquered them, and the 
emperor gave the kingdom of [the] tribe Judah unto Herod, 
which was a stranger, even an £domite, of the generation 
of Esau. 

Testament iiere, is an appointment made between 
God and man, and God's pr9mises. And Sacrament is a 
sign representing such appointment and promises ; as the 



Ttndale.] five books OF MOSES. 15 

rainbow representeth the promise made to Noah, that 
God will no more drown the world. And circumcision 
representeth the promises of God to Abraham, on the one 
side, and that Abraham and his seed should circumcise, 
and cut off the lusts of their flesh, on the other side, to 
walk in the ways of the Lord. As baptism, which is 
come in the room thereof, now signiiieth on the one side, 
how that all that repent and believe are washed in Christ's 
blood ; and, on the other side, how that the same must 
quench and drown the lusts of the flesh, to follow the 
steps of Christ. 

There were Tyrants in the earth in those days, for the 
sons of God saw the daughters of men, &c. The sons of 
God were the prophet's children, which, though they suc- 
ceeded their father, fell yet from the right way; and, 
through falsehood of hypocrisy, subdued the world under 
them, and became tyrants, as the suci^ssors of the apostles 
have played with us. 

Vapour. A dewy mist, as the smoke of a seething pot. 

To walk witli God, is to live godly, and to walk in his 
commandments. 

Enos walked with God, and was no more seen ; he 
lived godly, and died. God took him away ; that is, God 
hid his body as he did Moses and Aaron's, lest haply 
they should have made an idol of him, for he was a great 
preacher, and a holy man. 

Zaphnath Paenea. Words of Egypt are they (as 
1 suppose) ; and as much to say, as a man to whom secret 
things be opened ; or an ex|K>under of secret things, as 
some interpret it. 

That Joseph brought the Egyptians into such a subject 
tion, would seem unto some a very cruel deed : howbeit, 
it was a very equal way ; for they paid but the fifth part of 
that that grew on the ground, and therewith were they 
quit of all duties, botli of rent, custom, tribute, and toll : 
and the king therewith found them lords, and all ministers, 
and defended them. We now pay half so much unto tlie 



16 PROLOGUES TO THE [Tyndale. 

priests only, beside their other crafty exactions. Then 
pay we rent yearly, though there grow never so little on 
the ground ; and yet when the king calleth, pay we never 
the less. So that if we look indifferently, their condition 
was easier than ours ; and but even a very indifferent way, 
both for the common people, and the king also. 

See, therefore, tliat thou look not on the ensamples of 
the Scripture with worldly eyes, lest thou prefer Cain 
before Abel, Ismael before Isaac, Esau before Jacob, 
Ruben before Judah, Sarah before Phares, Manasses 
before Ephraim, and even the worst before the best, as 
thc} manner of the world is. 



A PROLOGUE 

INTO THE SECOND BOOK OF MOSES CALLED EXODUS. 



f\¥ the preface upon Genesis mayest thou understand 

how to behave thyself in this book also, and in all 

Learn here Other books of the Scripture. Cleave unto the text and 

how to read plain story, and endeavour thyself to search out the mean- 

Ktand the ing of all that is described therein, and die true sense of 

Scripture, j^n manner of speakings of the Scripture ; of proverbs, 

similitudes, and borrowed speech, whereof I entreated in 

the end of the obedience, and beware of subtle allegories. 

And note every thing earnestly, as things pertaining 

unto thine own heart and soul.. 

For as God used himself unto them of the Old Testa- 
ment, even so shall he unto the world's end use himself 
unto us which have received his holy Scripture, and the 
testimony of his son Jesus. As God doth all things here 



TfKl>Ai,B.] FIVE B(M>KS OP MOSES. 

for tJieni tliat believe his proitiiies, and hearken unto his 
coinniHiiihtifnl^f uad with patience cleave uuto him, and 
wsilk with him: even no shall he do for um, if we receive 
die witness of Christ with a strong faith, and endure 
patteinl}r foUowing his steps* And on the other .side, 
a!» tlie}' that fell from the proniiae of God through un- 
beliefi and from his law and ordinances^ through im- 
ps titnicv of llieir own lusts, were forsaken of God, and so 
perished ; even so sliall we, Ets niuay as do likevvise, and 
as many as mock with the doctrine of Chrislj and make a 
rloak of it to live fleshly, and to fallow our lusts. 

Note tliereto how God in found true at the last| and 
hoWf when all is pa.^t remedy, and brought into def^peni^ 
Uofi^ he then fuUtUetti his ptomise^j and Oiat by aa uhject 
and a cast~a\tay, a despised, and a refused person ; yea, 
«nd by ^ way imj>ossible to believe. 

The cause of all [the] captivity of God*8 people is this : 
tlie world ever hatelh them for their faith and trust which 
they have in G(»d : but in vaiu, till they fall frtnn the 
faith of the pronnses and love of the law and ordinances 
of God, aud put their truat in holy deeds of their own 
liutliiig, and li\e altogetlier at tlieir own lust and pleasure, 
witliout regard of God, or respect of their neighbour- 
Then Cfod forsaketh us, and seudeth us into captivity for 
our disiibonouritjg of his uume, and despi.'^iag of our 
ueighbitur. But the world persecuteth us for our faith in 
Christ only, (as the pope now doth) ami not for our 
nicked living. For in his kingdom thou mayest quietly, 
and Willi licence, and under a protection, do whatsoever 
aliumiuution thy heart iusteUi ; but God persecuteth 
us because we abuse his holy Testament, and becaiu^e, 
when we know llie truth, we follow it not. 

Note, also, the mightv hand of the Lord, how he 
playeUi widi his adversaries, and provokelh them, and 
»tirretli them up a little and a little, and delivereth not 
hii people in an hour; that both the patience of his 
elect, and also the worldly wit and wily policy of the 

VOL. II* c 



17 



J f we 
lieark cii 
Tin to itlL* 
rn\vi* of 
Gi>d, Jimt 
UlmlJ oiir- 
st'lvps til do 
hl:^ will, lie 
\v\li h€ Diir 
Got!, and 

ll^lp ll!4| 

iiiit {^iLer* 
wise J he 
vvi]| plague 
M!* US hf. 

iinilinnkfut 
ami tmlU- 



Trust fttwl 

Of 111 f (in J 
curt* ttot 
wbat tin* 
warld say. 



Tin- wprld 
lik**Ui weil- 
n\] wicked 

IJVL'fH RUd 

unirtirlly 



IS 



Here is set 
forlh the 
office of 
every good 



Temptft- 
lion U ilic 
trial of true 



r 



The excel- 
lency of 

fAith, which 
16 the gltt 
of Go4. 



Thoac 
whom God 
seofitgetli 
he dearly 
loveth. 



A neces* 
s*ry lesion 
for A giuyd 
prcacber 



PROUKiUES TO THE [Tttndalk, 

wicked f ^ herein ilh llicy do tight against God^ migiit 
appear. 

Mark the long-suffering and soft patience of Moses^ 
and how he loveth the people, and is ever between tlie 
wrath uf GckI and ttiem, and is ready to live and die with 
fheini mid to be put out of the book that God had written 
for their ^akes, (as Paul for his brethren^ Rom, ix.) and 
how he tiiketh his own wrongs patiently^ and never avengeth 
himself. And make not Moaes a figure of Christ with 
Rochester ; but an eusample nnto all princes, and to ^11 
that are in autlioritj , how to rule unto God's pleasure, and 
unto their neighbour's profit. For there is not a perfecter 
life in this world, both to the honour of God and profit of 
his neighbour, nor yet a greater cross, than to rule chris- 
tianly. And of A^iron also, see that thou make no figure 
of Christ, until lie come unto his sacriticing ; but an 
ensample unto all preachers of God's word, that they add 
nothing unto God's word, or [nor] take ought therefrom* 

Note also, how God sendeth his prtnnise to the 
people, and Moses confirmeth it with oiiracleaj and the 
people believe* But when temptation cometli they fall 
into unbelief, and few bide stand ing. Wliere thou seesl 
that all be not christian that will be so called, atid that 
the cross trieth the true from the feigned ; for if the 
cross were not, Christ should have discipJes enough. 
Whereof also thou seest, wiiat an excellent gift of God 
true faith is, and impossible to be had without tlie Spirit 
of Godp For it is ubove all natural power, that a man, in 
lime of temptation, when God scourgelh him, should 
believe then stediii.Htly iiow that God loveth him, and 
careth for him, and hath prepared all good things for him^ 
and that that scourging is an earnest that God hath elect 
and chosen Uhn. 

Note how oft Moses stirred them up to believe and 
trust in God, putting them hi remembrance alway in 
lime of temptation of the niiracles and wonders that Gotl 
halh wrought before time in their eye-sight. How 




TvsDALK] FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES. 

diligeutly also forbitldelh (le all tliat tniglit withdraw Uicir 
liearts from God ! To put iiutiglit to God'i^ word, to 
lake nought tliert^fnim : to do only that which in right m 
the sight of the L*jrd ; tiiut they should make no niatnier [uQ 
iniage, to ktieel dou n before it ; yea, that they should make 
none altar of hewed stone, f*>r fear of images ; to flee the 
ht^alhen idiilaters utleHy, and to destroy their idols, and 
cul ditwn their groves where they wor9hip]>ed : and that 
Uiey should not take the daughters of them unto their soiis^ 
niM give their daughters tf> tlie sons of them^ And that 
whoisoever moved any of tliem to worship false goda^ how- 
soever nigh of kin he w^ere, they must accuse him, and 
bring htm to death : yea, and whcresoe^'er they heard of 
mail, woman, or city that worshipped false gt>ds, they 
sh^mld slay them, and destroy the city for ever, and luit 
build it ;igain. Atid all Ijecau^e tlicy should worship nothhig 
but God, nor put confidence in atiy thing, save in his 
word. 

Yea, and how* w anieih he to beware of witchcraft, sor- 
CH'ry, f^ncliantment, iieCTomancy, and all crafts of the 
devil, and of dreamers, soothsayers, and of miracle-tlotTs 
to destroy his word, and Uiat they should suffer none such 
to live. 

TIjou wilt haply say. They tell a man the truth. What 
Iheo? God will that we care not to know what shall 
come. He will have us to care only to keep his com- 
mandments, and to commit all chances nnto him. He hath 
promised to care for us, and to keep ns fr<.jm all e\iL All 
things are in his hand ; lie can remedy all things ; and will, 
for his truth's sake, if we pray him. In his promises 
only will he have us trust, and there rest^ and to seek do 
fancier. 

How also doth he provoke them to love ; ever rehears- 
ing tlie beuetitM of God done to them already, and the 
godly promises that were to come 1 And how gootily 
bwa of love giveth he, to help one another; and that a 
maJi should not hete his neighbour in his heart, but love 

€ 2 



10 



God com« 

ninnflclb 
ihnt WK 

niakv no 



Hie Wftr- 

iiiiippmg of 
idolt fir 

nfitiuir^d of 
UQiK 



Wllclicmfl, 
atirci!ry, 

ed uf Q<mJ. 



Mcn»«€ifl)ea 
ri«lj(*tirBc-tli 
the )i«ticfiu 
of nlinightf 

moifc uii Id 
fcnf liim. 
And lit tor« 
diir nfijli- 



20 



God will 
have us to 
be merciful 
to our 
neighbours. 



All the ce- 
remonies 
of the Old 
Testament 
were but 
preachers 
of Christ 
that was 
to come. 



PROLOGUES TO THE [Tyndalb. 

him as himself, Lev. xix. And what a ciiarge giveth be 
in every place over the poor and needy ; over the stranger, 
friendless, and widow ! And when he desireth to shew 
mercy, he rehearseth withal the benefits of God done to 
thein at their need, that tliey might see a cause, at the least 
way in God, to shew mercy of very love unto their neigh- 
bours at tiieir need. 

Also there is no law so simple in appearance, throughout 
all the five books of Moses, but that there is a great reason of 
the making thereof, if a man search diligently. As that a 
man is forbid to seeth a kid in his mother's milk, moveth 
us unto compassion, and to be pitiful. As doth also 
that a man should not offer the sire or dam and the young 
both in one day. (Lev. xxii.) For it might seem a cruel 
thing, inasmuch as his mother's milk is, as it were, his 
blood ; wherefore God will not have him sod tlierein ; 
but will have a man show courtesy, upon the very beasts. 
As in another place he commandeth that we muzzle not 
the ox that treadeth out the com, (which manner of thresh- 
ing is used in hot countries,) and that because we should 
much rather to be liberal Imd kind unto men that do us 
service. Or haply, God would have no such wanton 
meat used among his people. For the kid of itself is 
nourishing, and the goat^s milk is restorative; and both 
together might be too rank, and therefore forbidden, or 
some other like cause there was. 

Of the ceremonies, sacrifices, and tabernacle, with all 
his glory and pomp, understand that they were not per- 
mitted only, but also commanded of God, to lead the 
people in the shadows of Moses and night of the Old 
Testament, until the light of Christ and day of the New 
Testament were come. As children are led in the phan- 
tasies of youth until the discretion of man's age be 
come upon them. And all was done to keep them from 
idolatry. 

The tabernacle was ordained to the intent they might 
have a place appointed them to do tlicir sacrifices oj)enly 



TtXDALE.] FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES, 

ill the sight of the people, and nataely, of the priests which 
%taited tht reoii ; that it might bt^ seen tliat they did all 
things according to God*a word, and not after die idolatry 
of their own imagination. And the costliueiifj of the taber- 
fiacle^ and the beauty also pertained tUereuiUo, tliat they 
should see nothing so beautifnl among the heathen, but that 
tJjey should see more beautiful and wonderful at home ; be- 
cause they should nut be moved to follow ihtjni* 

And Jti like manner the divers fashions of sacrifices and 
ceremonies was to occupy llieir minds, that they should 
have no lust to follow die heathen ; and the multitude of 
tliem was, that they should have so much to da in keeping 
tlienij that they should have no leisure to imagine other of 
their own : yea, and that God' s word might be thereby in 
all tliat they did , that they might have their faiUi and trust 
in God, which he cannot have tlnit followedi either his own 
inventions, or traditions of men's makingi without God's 
word* 

Finally: God hadi two Testaments, the Old and the 
New. The Old Testament is those temporal promises 
w hich God made die children of Israel of a good land, and 
that he w ould defend them, and of wealth and prosperity, 
and of temporal blessings, of which thou readest over all 
the law of Moses ; but namely. Lev. xxvi. and DeuL 
jcxvtii. and the avoiding of all threatenings and curses, of^ 
which thou readest likewise every where, but specially in 
the tw*o books above rehearsed ^ and the avoiding of all 
punishment ordained for the transgressors of die law. 

And tlie Old Testament was built altogetlier upon die 
keeping of tlie law and ceremonies, and was the reward of 
keeping of them in this life only, and reached no further than 
tliis life and dus world : as thou readest, Lev, xviii. *' A 
man diat doth them shall live therein;*' which text Paul 
rel^arseth, Rom. x, and Gal, iii» That is, he that 
keepeth Utem shall have this life gloriou^t, according to all 
ibe promises and blessings of the lav\', and shall avoitl both 
all temporal punishment of the law^ with all the threaten- 



tl 



Thv licaiity 
of xUe ta- 

WHS In ki*ep 

fioin 
lo tlie 



Gad hiid 

two Tcita^ 
m^i\L^f timt 
in, th« Old 
ami lUo 
New* 



The OM 

Teimnieiit 
was buitt 
upon the 
obscrrjt- 
Utiu o( th« 
Ihw, 



Hic law 
could DOt 
gWe life* 



Ttic Uw U 
Mot tlir 
uttercr of 



Tbc law 

bjr God lo 

sbew what 
sia waA. 



Cl?TCll»0* 

iii«» Ar« not 

jijslify lliu 
lie&rt, but 
to slg^nify 
our ju»ti- 
ficatioQ by 
Cliriit. 



I'llO LOG LIES TO THE LT^ni^^le. 

Jitgs and cursings also» For neitlier Uie law, ev€ii of tiie teii 
CGiiitttaiMhneuts, nor yet the cereinoiiies, justified in the heart 
before God, or pnritieti unto the life to come. Insomuch^ 
that Moses at his deulh, even forty years after the law 
and ceremonies were given, complaineth, saving, God 
hatfi not gi\en you an heart to uiidenitantl, nor eyes to 
see, nor ears to hear unto this day< As who should say, 
God hath given you ceremonies, hut ye know not the use 
of them ; and hath given yon a law, but huth not w ritten it 
in your hearts. 

Wherefore ser^etli the law then, if it giveth us no power 
to do the law ? Paul answereththem, that it was given to 
utter sin only, and to make it appear* As a conosive is 
laid unto an old sore, not to heal it, but to stir it up, and 
make the disease alive, that a man might feel in what 
Jeopardy he is, and how nigh deatti, and not aware, and 
to make a way unto the healing pluister. 

Even so saiih Paul, Gal, iii. ** The law was given 
because of transgression, (that is, to make tJie sin alive, 
that it might be felt and seen,) until the seed came unto 
whom it was pjoniised : that is to say, until the children of 
faith came, or until Christ, that seed in whom God pro- 
mised Abraham tliat all nations of the world should be 
blessed, came. 

That is, the law was given to utter sin, death, damnation, 
and curscj and to drive us iinto Christ, in whom forgive^ 
ncss, life, justifying, and blessings were promised ; tliat 
we might see so great love of Goil to uswani in Christ, 
that we, henceforth overcome with kindness, might love 
again, and of love keep the commandments. 

Now he tliat goeth about to quiet his conscience, and 
to justify himself with the law, doth but heal his wounds 
with fretting corrosives. And he that goeth about to pur- 
chase grace wiUi ceremonies, doth but suck the ale pole to 
quench liis thirst, inasmuch as the ceremonies were not 
given to justify tlie heart, but to signify the justifying, and 
forgiveness that is in Clirist's blood. 





TrNDALB.] FIVE 

Of tlie cereinonieii that ihe) justify not llioii readejit 
Heb* %. '* It k impossible that sin shoiiltl be done away 
^itli lh€ blood of uxen and goats/' And of tht; law thoti 
deadest, Gal. iit. " If there had been a law given tliat 
could have quickened or given life^ then had righteousness^ 
or justitying, come by the law indited, Now the law not 
only quickenedi nut die hearty but hIso woundt^tii it with 
coiiscierice of sin, atid miniBtereth death and datiination 
unto her/' 3 Cor* lii* So tlmt she must needs die and 
be damped, except she tiiid other remedy* So far it is off 
tiiat she is justitied, or hol[)en by the h\^\ 

The new^ Testament is those everlustuig prcmiises which 
are made us in Christ the Lord, througliout all the Scnp- 
tme* And that 1 estatnent is built on faith ^ and not in works* 
Fof it is not said of that Testament, He that worketh 
shall live ; but *^ he that believeth shall live :'* as tliou 
readest, John iii. '' God so loved the world that he 
gave his only begotten Son, Uiat none which believe in him 
should perish, but have hfe everlasting^^ 

And when tliis Testament is preached and believed, the 
Spirit enteretli the heart, and quickeneth it, and givedi her 
life, and justiiieth her. The Spirit also maketli die law a 
lively thing in the heart, so that a man bringeth fortli good 
works of his own accord, without compulsion of the law, 
witliout fear of threatenings, or cursings ; yea, and without 
all manner respect or love unto any temporal pleasure, 
but of the very jxjwer of the Spirit, received through 
&itl], w& thou readestj John i. " He gave them power 
to be Ihe sons of God, in tliat they believed on his 



And of that power they work ; so that he which hatli 
the Spirit of Christ is now no more a child : he neither 
kametli nor worketh any longer for pain of the rod, or for 
fear of bugs or pleasure of apples, but doth all diings of 
his own courage : as Christ saith, John vii. " He that 
believeth on me shall have rivers of living waters flowing 
out of his belly/' Tliat is, all good works, and all gifts 



fnitli IB, 
tkerc goct 1 
wnrkA do 
^ovr nnd 



ti 



waa from 

tht? begio- 



Our R'm- 
poral laws 
Bpr'ing out 
lif iht; lavr 
0f miiure. 



Lo^c conn- 
Bclletli tht* 
fjtilhful lo 



Wc must 
not prv- 
■uiue in 

oyr well- 
dtMn(2r» nor 

OtllL'fl {utit 

^\m vairay ; 
ttirocth tci 

God, IB A» 

fur forward 
## the fir^U 



PROLOGUES TO THE [Tvndalk. 

of grace 5|>riiig *mt of him imturaHy> and by their own 
accord, '^Fhou iieedtrst not to wrest g<>od ^^'orks otit of 
him, as a man would wring verjuice out of cralia : nay, 
they flcjw iintuntlly out of him, as springs out of rocks. 

The New Te^itanient w as ever, even fioni tlie beginning 
of the world. For there were always proniises of Cluist 
to come by faith, in which promises the elect were then 
justified inwanlly bef«t>rc God, as outwarilly before the 
worldy by keeping of tlie law and cerenionic^s. 

And in conclusion, ^ thou seest blessings, or cursing^s 
follow the breaking or keeping of the law of Moses ; even 
so, naturally, do the blessings or cursings follow the break- 
ing or keeping of the law of nature, out of wliich spring 
all our temporal law^s. So that when the people keep the 
temporal laws of tlieir land, lemp<jra! piXKsperit), and all 
manner of i*uch temjjoral blessings (as thou readest of in 
Moses) do accompany them, and fall upon them. And, 
contrariwise, rvhen they mn unpunii^hed, and when the 
rulers have no re^^pect unto equity or honesty, then God 
s^ndeth \m curse among themj as hunger, dearth, nutrrain, 
banning, pestilence, war, oppression, with strange and 
wonderful diseases, and new kinds of misfortune and evil 
luck. 

If any man ask me, seeing that faith justiheth me^ Why 
I work / I answer, Love compelletli me. For as long 
as my soul feeteth what love God hath shewed me in 
Clirist, I cannot but love Go<l again, mid liis will and 
commandments, and of love work diem, nor can they 
seem hard unto tne. I think not myself better for my 
working, nor seek heaven, nor an higher place in heaven, 
because of it. For a Christian worketli to make his weak 
brother perfecter, and not to seek an higher place in 
heaven. I compare not myself unto him that workelh n<*t. 
Noj he tluit worketli not to-day, shall have grate to turn, 
and to M'ork toni^rrow^ ; and in the mean season I pity hirn^ 
and pray for him. If I had wnmght the will of God 
these thousauit years, and another had wrought die will of 



Tyndale.] five books OF MOSES. 25 

the devil as long, and this day turn and be as well willing 
to suffer with Christ as I, he hath this day overtaken me, 
and is as far come as I, and shall have as much reward as 
I : and I envy him not, but rejoice most of all as of lost 
treasure found. 

For if I be of God, I have these thousand years suffered 
to win him, for to come and praise the name of God with 
me. These thousand years I have prayed, sorrowed, 
longed, sighed, and sought for that which I have this day 
found; and therefore rejoice with all my might, and 
praise God for his grace and mercy. 



A TABLE, 

EXPOUNDING CERTAIN WORDS OF THE SECOND 
BOOK OF GENESIS. 



A LBE. A long garment of white linen. 

Ark. a coffer, or chest, as our shrines, save it was 
flat, and the sample of our shrines was taken thereof. 

Booth. An house made of boughs. 

Brestlap, or brestflap, is such a flap as thou seest in 
the breast of a cope. 

Consecrate. To appoint a thing to holy uses. 

Dedicate. Purify or sanctify. 

Geeras. In weight as it were an English halfpenny, 
or somewhat more. 

Heave-Offering. Because they were hoven up 
before the Lord. 

House. He made them houses: that is, he made a 
kindred, or a multitude of people to spring out of them ; 
as we say the house of David, for the kindred of David. 

Peace-offering. Offerings of thanksgiving of de- 
votion, and not for conscience of sin and trespass. 



26 PROLOGUES TO THE [Tyndalb. 

Pollute. Defile. 

Reconcile. To make at one, and to bring in grace or 
favour. 

Sanctify. To cleanse and purify ; to appoint a thing 
unto holy uses, and to separate from unclean and unholy 
uses. 

Sanctuary. A place hallowed and dedicate unto6od« 

Tabernacle. A house made tentwise, or as a pavilion. 

TuNiCLE.' Much like the uppermost garment of the 
deacon. 

Waive-offering. Because they were waiven in the 
priest's hands to divers quarters. 

Worship. By worshipping, whether it be in the Old 
Testament, or New, understand the bowing of a man's 
self upon the ground : as we ofttimes, as we kneel in our 
prayers, bow ourselves, and lie on our arms and haiidsy 
with our face to the ground. 

Of this word I will be, cometh the name of Grod, 
Jehovah, which we interpret Lord ; and is as much to say, 
as I am that 1 am. (chap, iii.) 

That I here call a sheep, in Hebrew is a word indif- 
ferent to a sheep and a goat both. (chap, xii.) 

The Lamb was called passover; that the very name 
itself should put them in remembrance what it signified ; 
for the signs that God ordained either signified the benefits 
done, or promises to come, and were not dumb, as the signs 
of our dumb god the Pope. 

Jehovah Nissi. The Lord is he that exalteth me. 
(chap, xvii.) 

Ephod is a garment somewhat like an amice, save the 
arms came through, and it was girded too. 

Shbwbread. Because it was always in the sight and 
presence of the Lord. (chap, xxv.) 



IVH^JILIK.] 



FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES, 



n 



A PROLOGUE 
INTO THE TtURD Bm)K OF MOSES CALLED LEVITICUS, 



T^HE ceremonies which are described in the book follow- 
ing were chiefly urdaiiied of God , (as I said in the 
end of tlie Prokigue upon Exodus,) to occupy the minds 
nf llitit people the Israelites, and to keep them from sen- 
mg of GtHi after the imagination of their blind zeal and 
good inteot; that their conscietices might be stahlistied^ 
and tiiey sure lhi»t diey pleased God therein, which were 
impossible, if a man did of his own head that which was 
not commanded of Go*l, nor depended of any appointment 
made between him and God. Such ceremonies were unto 
tiieni as an ABC, to learn to spell and read ; and m a nurse, 
to feed them with milk and pap, and to speak unto them 
after their own capacity, and to lisp the words unto them, 
according as the babes and children of that age might 
tmtnd them again* For iiU that were before Christ were 
in tlie infancy and childhood of the world^ and saw tliat 
sun whicli we see o}>enly, but tlirough a cloudy and had 
but feeble and weak imaginations of Christy as children 
have of naen's deeds, a few prophets except, which yet 
described him unto other in sacriiices and ceremonies, 
likenesses, riddles, proverbs, and dark and strange speak* 
mgt utitil the full age were come, that God would shew 
him openly unto the whole world, and deliver them from 
iheir shadows and cloud-light, and the heathen out of tlieir 
dead sleep of stark blind ignorance. And as the shadow 
vanisheth away at the coming of the light, even so do the 
ceremonies and sacrifices at the coming of Christ j and are 
henceforth no more necessary than a token left in remem- 
brance of a bargain, is necessary when the bargain is 



MiinV 
wisdom \& 
plnin iilo- 
latry, it 
scatleri^tb, 
divuleth, 
Mid mak- 
eth sects. 



Ceretno- 

ti]e»to the 
hriu;l]tL*s 
and Jews 
were us 
good 
BcbooU 
masters arc 
to young 
scUoUrs. 



An things 
were first 
revealed In 
ccremoiiiei 
mid sha- 
dows, 
uDtil U 
plenaed 
Almighty 
Goii to 
reveal his 
Son Jesus 
Cbrist. 



98 



FROLOCUES TO THE 



[TyNDALE. 



I 



Small luid^ 
liuie gifts 
giTcn by 
the part!nta 
to their 
cbildrcn, 
cauietli 
lore and 
obcdiCDce* 



S&erifice» 
find cere 
monies 
Bcrve for 
allegurieji 
to fiad out 
Ckrist. 

SimlUtudee 
putyrc 
noibijigi 
but do 
more p]«in- 
ly lead tbcc 
lo under ■ 
staa4 tlia 
texL 



Some ce - 
remoDica 
contnin 
vrJioleaotDc 
and pro- 
fitable do€^ 
trine.. 

Ceremo* 
Die* or- 
daioed to 
conftrm our 

mm. 



fullillcd. And though they seem piniti childishp yet they 
|j€ nol altogether fruitlests ; as the pii|j|>ets, and twenty 
maimer of liiflesp whicli mothers permit unto their young 
childri^nj be not all in vain. For albeit that such fanta^iea 
be permitted to satisfy the children's lusts, yet in that they 
are the motlier's gift, and be done in place and time at her 
commandment, tliey keep the children in awe, and make 
them know the mother, and abo make them more apt 
against a more (Stronger age to obey in things of gresiter 
earnest, 

. And moreover, though sacrifices and ceremonies can be 
no ground or foundation to build upon ; that is, though 
we can prove nought witli iJiem j yet when we have once 
found out Christ and his mysteries , then we may borrow 
figures, that is to say allegories, similitudes, or examples 
to open Christ, and the secrets of God hid iii Christ, even 
unto the quick, and to declare them more lively and sen- 
sibly with tliem than with alt the words of the world. For 
similitudes have more virtue and [>ower \"i'ith them than 
bare words, and lead a man*s wits farther uito th*^ pith and 
marrow and spiritual understanding "of the thing, than all 
the words tliat can lie imagined. And though also that 
all the ceremonies and sacriiices have, as it were, a star- 
light of Clirist, yet some tliere be that have, as it w^ere, tlie 
light of tlie broad day, a little before the sun rising, and 
express him, and the circumstances and virtue of his death 
so plainly, as if we should play his passion on a scaffold, or 
in a stage play, oj^enly before the eyes of the people : as 
the scape goat, the brazen serpent, the ox burnt without 
the host, the passover lamb, &c. Insomuch that I am 
fully persuaded, and cannot but believe tliat God had 
shewed Moses tlie secrets of Cbistj and tlie ver^^ manner 
of his death before hand, atid commanded him to ordain 
them for the confirmation of our faitli, which are now in 
tlie clear day light. And I believe also that the [>rophels, 
which followed Moses to confirm his prophecies, and to 
maintain his doctrine uutf* Christ's coming, were moved by 



^ 



TfKDALKO FIV^ BOOKS OF MOSES, 

such tilings to i^urcli farther of ChriBl^s sGcrets* And 
tboiigh GikI woulil nnt liave llie secrets of Cliikt generuUy 
Itnowti, save mitu a few faniiliur fri etuis > >vluch in ihai in- 
fkncy he matk of man*s wit tn belp tlie otlier babes ; yet 
as they had a general promise liiat one of the seed of 
Aiiraham should come and bless thenij even so they had a 
genentl faith that God would by tlie same niaii save them, 
ifiough they nist not by what means ; as tlie very apostles j 
wlien it was oft told tliem, yet they could never compre- 
beiid it» till it was fulfilled in deed* 

And beyond all diisj their sacriHces and ceremonies, a* 
fiir fordi as tlie promise* amiexed unto tltem extend, so far 
foith tbey saved them and jtisiitied diem, and stood them 
in the same itead as our Saemments do us ; not by the 
|>ower of die sacriiice or deed itself, hut by the virtue of 
die faith in the promise, which die sacrifice or ceremony 
preached, and whereof it was a token or sign. For the 
cerenionies and sucritices were left with them, and com- 
manded thcni to kee|) the promise in remembrance, and 
to wake up their faith. As it is not enough to send 
majiy on erraiids^ and to tell them what they shall do ; 
but they must have a remembrance with them, and it be 
byt a ring of a rusli about one of their tingers. And as 
it is not enougti to make a bargain with words only, but 
we must put thereto an oath, and give earnest to confirm 
the faiUi of the person with whom it is made. And in 
bke manner if a man promise, whatsoever trifle it be, 
it is not believed except lie hold up his tiager also; such 
is the weakness of the world. And therefore Christ him- 
self used oftentimes divers ceremonies in curing the sick, 
to stir up their faith with a L As for an ens am pie : it was not 
llie bioofl of the Lamb that saved theni in Egypt, when 
the angel liniole the Egyptians ; but the mercy of Godj 
and his truths whereof diat blood was a token and re- 
niembrance, to stir tip their faiths MitlniL For tlunigh 
ICjod make si prumbe, yet it saveth none linally, but them 
lliat long for it, and pray God with a sjirong faith to fultiP 



29 

crets were 
tip(.'iit!^l hilt 
to a (iWi 



The ccnc- 
mutiiea of 
Lhettiseh-eB 
savL*fS imtj 
but fttitli in 
God*» pro- 



Our tiahire 
is su wi'nk, 
tliat we 
mm% 1i0 
holpetj Uy 
outwnrd 
^i^^Tia null 
tokens. 



Nn itimti is 
imljien by 
GficJ'fl pro- 
inlscjif but 
niiiiDmtUat 
feci ihek 



ao 



FUOLOGUES TO THE 



[TVNOALE* 



SaCfA- 

truly ml- 
btflturcd 
Are pro- 



truly mt- 
blateredt 
prwicli 

untu us 
repentance 
of uuriiaB. 



Not naked 
or diMitb 
eercmo- 
nieSf but 
tbc Haly 
Ghoftt, 
througb 
fnith, 
wiihcth 
A way aiaii. 



Tiie diffe- 
retice be- 
tveea fi 
sufiiee 
ftod a«k> 
cmuieaL 



it, for his uierc}' and truth only, and kiiowli^dge their uu- 
wartkinesii* And even .so our Sarrjimeuts (if they be 
truly ministered) preaeli Christ unto us, and lead our 
faiths unto Christ; by which faith our sins are dotie 
away^ and not by the deed or work of the Sacrament. 
For as it was iui|>os3ible that the blood of calves should 
put away **in ; even so is it impossible that the water of 
the river should waah our hearts* Nevertheless^ the Sa- 
craments cleanse us, and absolve us of our sins as t[:e 
priests do^ in preaching of repentance and faitli, for 
which cause either of them were ordained ; but if they 
Ijreach not, whether it be tlie priest or the Sacrament^ 
so profit they not. 

And if a man allege Christ, John in the 5d chapter^ 
saying, '' Except a man be born again of water and of 
the Holy Ghostj he cannot see the kingdom uf God," 
and will therefore that the Holy Ghost be present in the 
water, and therefore the very deed or work doth put away 
sin ; then 1 will send him unto Paul^ which a^keth his 
Galatitins, whether they received the Holy Ghost by the 
deed of the law, or by preaching of faith ; and there con- 
chide th that the Holy Ghost accompanielh the preaching 
of faith, and with the word of faith enteretli the heart and 
purgeth it ; which thou mayest also uuderstand by 
St.- Paul saying, ** Ye are borne anew out of the water 
through die word.'* So now if baptism preach me the 
washing in Christ's blood, so doth the Holy Ghost ac- 
company it J and that deed of preaching, tli rough faith ^ 
doth put away my sins. For the Holy Ghost is no 
dumb God J nor no God that goeth a miunming* If a 
man say of the Sacrament of Christ*s body and blood, 
that it is a sacrifice as well for the dead as for the quick, 
and tlierefore the very deed itself justilieth and puttetli 
away sin ; I answer, that a sacrifice is the slaying of the 
body of a beast, or a man : wherefore, if it be a sacrifice, 
then is Christ's body there slain, and his blood there shed j 
but that is not so. And therefore it is properly no sacri- 
fice, but a jjucrauient, and a memorial *>f that everlasting 




TlfKDALE.] 



Fl\^ BOOKS OF MOSES. 



M 



sacriAce once for all^ which he offered upou the cross 
now upon a fifteen huuHred years ago^ atid preacheth only 
unto them that are alive. And as for them Uiat be dead^ 
it 19 as proBtable unto them a^ is a candle in a lanthern 
without light unto them that walk by the way in dark 
ttight ; and aj the gospel song in Latin is unto them that 
understand none at all, and as a sermon preuched to him 
that is dead, and heareth it not. It preaeheth unto them 
that are alive only ; for they that be dead, if they died in 
the faith which that Sacrament preaeheth, they be safe, 
and are past all jeopardy. For when they were alive 
their hearts loved the law of God, and tlierefore sinned 
not, and were sorry that their members sinned, and ever 
moved to sin, and Uierefore, through faiths it was forgiven 
them. And now their sinful members be dead, so that 
they can now siu no more ; wherefore it is unto them that 
be dead neither Sacrament nor sacrifice. But under the 
pretence of their soul-heulth, it is a servant unto our spi- 
ritualties holy covetousness, and an extortioner, and a 
builder of abbeys, colleges, chauntries and catliedral 
churches with false gotten good, a pickpurse, a polar, and 
a bottomless bag. 

Some man would haply say, that the prayers of the 
mass help nmch ; not the living only^ but also the dead. 
Of the hot fire of their fervent prayer, which consumelli 
faater than all the world is able to bring sacritice, 1 have 
aaid sufficiently in other places, Howbeit it is not pos- 
sible to bring me in belief, that the prayer wliich helpeth 
her own master unto no virtue should purchase nic the 
forgiveness of sins. If I saw tiiat (heir prayers had ob- 
tained them grace to live such a life as God's word did not 
rebuke, then could I soon be borne in hand that what- 
soever they asked God, their prayers should not be in 
vain. But now what good can he wish me in hi^s 
prayers, that envielh me Christ, the food and the life of niy 
soul ? What good can he wish nie, whose heart cleaveth 
asunder for pain, when I am taught to repent of my evil ? 



Whut fttate 
wf die in, 
iTic BAnie 
we shull 
The njftkin, 
cither of 
sntvuUonor 
dainnnliDn. 



The 5*«cra- 
ments are 
unto Uic 
dead no 
lacramentft 
il aU. 

SAcratncnts 
Abuacfl by 
the ctergj-* 



TUe PapUta 
ha^e DO 
smntl 
frienti and 
good lielper 
of the iiias«. 

Hypocrites*' 
prayers eiin 
ndther 
profit 

Ihem^elves 
nor any 
mnu eJse. 



TUoie that 
are ene- 
mies io the 
word of 
Gild* love 
neither 
God nor 
hw people* 



n 



PROLOGUES TO THE 



[Tyndale. 



ftre ta W 
well weigh- 
rd ntid 
considered 

Tlie grcnt- 
cst CAUse 
of II lo dc* 
CAV tif fiiilU 
nnfl blind- 
nessi Ibal 
ifrp * ere in 

WAS 

thraugh 

How ^tle- 
gorii's are 
lo Ih*' un- 



Hie rif ht 
US4* of aU 
k'gi tries. 



Baptism U 
iliL* ctjm* 
mut\ Undgc 
of (vU true 

i>f LlirUt- 



Farlhennore, because Uial few know the use of die Old 
Testament^ and the most part think it nothing necessary 
but to ^takt^ uUcgorieis, which they hiin every man after 
iiisown bmin at all wild adventure^ without any certain rtdc ; 
therefore (though 1 have vSpu ken uf them in another place,) 
yet^ lest the book come not to all men's hands tliat shall 
read this, I will speak of tlieiii here also a word or twain. 

We hatl need to take heed every where that w^e be not 
beguiled witli false allegories, whether ihey be drawn out 
of the New Testament or the Old, either out of any oilier 
story, or of the creatures of the world, but namely in this 
book. Here a man had need to put on all his spectacles, 
aud to nnn himself again??! invisible spirits. 

First, allegories prove notling; (ami by ullegories un- 
derstand eahamples or similitudes borrowed of strange 
matters, and of another thing tlian Uiou entreatest of«) 
As though circumciMon be a iigure of baptism, yet thou 
can^t not prove b^iptism by circumcision. For thi» argu- 
ment were very feeble; the Israeli tei^ were circumcised > 
tlierefore we must be baptised, Aud in like niaiiuer, 
though the offering of Isaac were a rigure or ensample of 
the resurrection, ytt is this argiiment nought ; Abraham 
would have offered Isaac, but God dehvered him from 
death, therefore we shall rise again, and so forth in all 
other. 

But the very use of allegories is to declare and o|)en a 
text, that it may be tlie better perceived and understood. 
As when I have a clear text t»f Christ and the apostles, 
tliat I amst be baptised, tljen I may borrow an example 
of circumcision to express the nature, power, and fruit, or 
effect of baptism. For as circumcision was unto them a 
common badge, signifying tliat they were all soldiers of 
God, to war his war, and separating them from all 
other nations^ disobedient unto God : even so baptism is 
our common badge, and sure earnest aud per|>etnal tne^ 
morial that we |H^rtain unto Christ, and are separated 
from all that are not Christ *s» Ai»d as cirLumciivion wa« 




TTNDAL8,] 



FIVE BOOKB OF MOSES. 



as 



a token c€rtjr>ing lliem that the^ were received uto the 
livour of God, £tiid their sidm forgiven them ; even so 
baptism certiiieth us that 'w e are washed in the blood of 
Christy and received to favour for his sake ; and as circum- 
cision signified unto them the cutting away of their own 
huts, and slaying of their free-will, as they call it, to follow 
the Will of God, even .so baptism signitieth unto us re- 
pentance, and the niortifying of our unruly members ami 
body uf sin^ to walk in a new life, and so forth. 

And likewke, though thut the saving of Noah, and 
of ibem that were w itli him in the ship, through w ater, is 
a figure, that k to say an example and Ukenesii of baptism, 
as Peter maketh it^ ( 1 Fet, iiip) yet I canuot prove baptbm 
therewith, save describe it only. For as the ship saved 
them in the water through faith, in that they believed 
God, and as the other that would not believe Noah |je- 
fished ; even so baptism aaveth us through the word of 
faith which it preacheth^ when all the world of the unbe- 
lieving perish. And Paul (1 Cor, x.) maketh the sea and 
the cloud a figure of baptism^ by which, and a thousand 
more, I might declare it, but not prove it- [JPaul also, in 
Uie said place, maketh the rock out of which Moses 
brought water unto tlie chddren of Israel, a figure or 
ensainple of Christ ; not to prove Christ (for that were im- 
possible,) but to describe Christ only ; even as Christ him- 
self (John ill*) borroweth a similitude or figure of the 
brazen serpent, to lead Nicodemus from his earthly ima- 
gination into the spiritual understanding of Christ's say- 
ing; ** As Mos€& lifted up a serpent in the wilderness, so 
must the son of man be lifted up, that none that believe 
iu him perish, but have everlasting life/' By which simi- 
btude, the virtue of Christ's death is better described than 
thou couidest declare it with a thousand words. For as 
those mumiurers against God, as soon as they repented, 
were healed of their deadly wounds, through looking on 
the brazen serpent only, without medicine or any 
other help, yea, and without any other reason but thnt 

VOL. n. D 



teachiHta ui 
repetitHiice 
of iiill. 



The hnre 

lie L petti 
not;, but 
tliroiigh 
the ward oi 
fit it h ii 
purlfielli lo. 



How Christ 
borroweth 
fififurieiior 
the Old 
Testntneat, 
lo tnftk« 
plnlu the 
%e%U of 
the New 
Tesitwnifal* 



31 



FRQLOGUES TO THE 



{TyNDJkLK. 



Our duty ii 
to do good 
deeds, but 

we cajiuiit 
chidleDgc 
Ihereby* 



A good ex- 
iitii|i1« 
taken of 

tLe le|H^rft. 



The true 
preJicbing 
uf God's 

word doth 
bind Atid 
IckfttS con- 
ftcieaces. 



God Imili Hmd it should be 6o, aud not to murmur again, 
but to leave their murmuring ; even so M that repent, and 
believe in Christ, are «aved from everiasling death^ of pure 
grace^ without^ and before ^ their good works, and not to sin 
again|but to tight against sin, and henceforth to sin no more^ 

Even so wjtii the ceremonies of this book thou canst 
prove nothing, save describe^ and declare only the putting 
away of our sins through tlie death of Christ. For Christ 
is Aaron and Aarun'is sons^ and all that offer the sacrifice 
to purge siu. And Christ is alt manner [of] offering that is 
offered : he is the ox, the sheep, the goat, tlie kid, and 
lamb : lie is the ox that is burnt witliout the host, and 
the scape-goat tliat carried all the sin of tlie people away 
into the wilderness : for as they purged the people from 
their worldly uncleannesses through blood of the sacri- 
iiceSf even so doth Christ purge us from the tmc leannesses 
of everlasting death witli his own blood, and as their 
worldly sins could no otherwise be purged than by blood 
of sacritiees, even so can our sins be no otherwise forgiven 
than through the blood of Christ, AH the deeds tn the 
world J save the blood of Christ, can purchase no forgive- 
ness of Bins ; for our deeds do but help our neighbour, 
and mortify the Aesh, and help that we sin no more ; but 
and if we have sinned, it must be freely forgiven through 
the blood of Christ, or remain ever* 

And in like manner of the lepers thou canst prove 
nothing : thou canst never conjure out confession tiience, 
howbeit thou hast an handsome example tliere to to open 
the binding and loosing of our priests with the key of 
God's word ; for as they made no man a leper, even so 
ours have no power to command any man to be in sin, 
or to go to purgatory or helL And therefore (inasmucb 
as binding and loosing is one power,) as those priests 
healed no nian> even so ours cannot of their invisible and 
dumb power drive any man's sins away^ or deliver him 
from hell, or feigned purgatory. Howbeit if they preached 
God*3 word purely, which is the autliority that Christ gave 



Ty?jpalc>] 



FIV'E BOOKS OF MOSES- 



m 



ibem^tbeti they should bind ^nd loose ^ kill and msike alive 
agaiti, make uticleaii and clean again, and »end to hell and 
fetch thence again, so mighty b God's word. For if 
they preached the law of God, they should bind the 
consciences of sinners with the bunds of the pains of hell, 
and bring them unto repentance. And tlien if they 
preached nnto them the mercy that is in Christ, they should 
looie ihem and qntet their raging consciences^ and certify 
them of the favour of God, mni that their sin^ be forgiven. 
Finally^ lieware of allegories ; for there is not a more 
handsome or apt Uiing to beguile withal than an allegory ; 
nor a more subtle and pestilent thing in the world to per- 
anade a false matter than an allegory. And contrariwise ; 
there is not a better ^ vehem enter, or mightier thing to 
make a man understand withal than an allegory. For 
allegories make a man quick witted, and print wisdom in 
him J and maketb it to abide, where bare words go but in 
mt the one ear, and out at the other. As this, w^ith such 
like sayings : " Put salt to all your sacrifices j" instead of 
thisientence, *' Do all yourdeeds with discretion,*' greeteth 
and bite til, (if it be understood) more than plain words. 
And when I say, instead of these words, ** Boast not 
yourself of your good deeds," **eat not the blood, nor the 
fat of your sacrifice j *^ there is as great difference between 
them as there is distance between heaven and earth. For 
the life and beauty of all good deeds is of God, and we are 
but the carrion-lean, we are only the instrument whereby 
God worketh only, but the power is his. As God created 
Paul anew, poured his wisdom into him, gave him mighty 
and promised him that his grace should never fail him, &.Cp 
and all without deservings, except that nurtering the 
saints, and making them curse and rail on Christ, be me- 
ritoriouB. Now, as it is death to eat the blood or fat of 
any sacrifice, is it not (think ye,) damnable to rob God 
of Ills honour^ and to glorify myself with his honour ? 



In allego- 
ries \s (mill 
iioury nnd 
pHJS i tKftt 
tA to aay, 
bath i^oud 
tind evil. 



def^dB are 
God's 
wurkman- 
sliip, and 
we bia in- 
strumetiU 
irhereby 
he dptli 
tbcm. 



d2 



«e PROLOGUES TO THE [Tyndalk. 



AN EXPOSITION 

OF CERTAIN WORDS OF THE FOURTH BOOK OF MOSES 
CALLED NUMERL 



j/^VIMS. A kind of giants ; and the word signifieth 
crook^d^ unright, or wicked. 

Belial. Wicked, or wickedness ; he diat hath cast the 
yoke of God o£f his neck, and will not obey God. 

Bruterer. ProphesierSy or soothsayers. 

£m1ms» a kind of giants so called, because diey were 
terrible and cruel ; Tor Emin signifiedi terribleness. 

En ACRE. A kind of giants, so called haply because 
they wore chains about their necks; for enach b such a 
chain as men wear about dieir necks. 

HoRiMS. A kind of giants, and signifiedi noble; 
because diat of pride they called themselves nobles, or 
gentles. 

Rock. God is called a rock, because both he and his 
word lasteth for ever. 

Whet them on thy Children. That is, exercise 
thy children in them, and put them in use. 

Zamzumims. a kind of giants; and signifieth mis- 
chievous, or that be always imagining. 



Tykpal^O 



FIVE BOOKS 



THE PROLOGUE 
INIO THE FOUIITH BOOK OP MOSES CALLED NUMERL 



IN die second and third book they received the law; ami 
ill thiM fourth they begin to work and to practhie. Of which 
practicing ye see many good ensaniples of unbelief^ and 
what free will doth, when she taketh in hand to keep the 
law of her own power, without help of faith in the promises 
of God I bow she leaveth her master's carcasses by the 
way in the wilderness, and bringeth them not into the land 
of rest. Why could they not enter in 1 Because of their 
ynbelief. (Heb. iii.) For had they believed, so had they 
been under grace, and tlieir old sitis hud been forgiven 
them ; and power should have been given them to have 
fulfilled the law thenceforth, and they should have been 
kept from all temptations that had been too strong for 
them. For it is written^ (John i.) "He gave them power 
to be the sons of God, tlirough believing in his name." Now 
to be the son of God is to love God and his command- 
tnents, and to walk in his way after the ensample of his 
Son Christ. But these people took upon ihem to work 
without faitli, as thou seest in the xivUi of this book, where 
they would lights and also did, ^ ithout the word of pro- 
mise; even when tliey were warned tliat they should not* 
And in the xvith again, they would please God with their 
holy, faithless works (for where God*s word is not there can 
be no faiUi,) but llie hrtj of God consumed tbeh- holy 
works, as it did Nadab and Abihu* (Levitt x*) And 
from these unbelievers tuni thine eyes unto the Pharisees, 
which before tlie coming of Christ in his flesh had laid the 
foundation of free-will after the same ensample « Whereon 
they built holy works after their own imagination, w ithout 



Then csm^ 
hot Ihpv !«? 
til* cliil- 
dren of 
GoJ, whicb 
put mort^ 
truM in 
tbeJr oivrt 
worl^K tlinn 
in lilt* UKiod 

of fll'Stlil 

ChriBl. 



58 



PROLOGUES TO THE 



[Tyndal*, 



Failhl«es 
worki. 



Tlnf FHari- 
*(rcs^ by 
Ibcir frc?i!- 

(led llietn- 
sclres from 
the ^Ira- 
Hon m 
Clirbt. 



to Climt'i 
dt!iittti 



O iiibtk 

foKest 

tbf«}agh 

poverty 

made ibem- 

selves 

lords of 





faith of the word| so fervently, that for the great zeal of 
them, they slew the king of all holy works, and the Lord 
of freev%ill, which only through his grace maketh the will 
free, and loose th her from bondage of sin, and giveth her 
love and lust unto ihe laws of God, and ^wwer to fuUil 
them. And so throngh their holy works done by the 
power of freewill, they excluded themselves out of the 
holy rest of forgiveness of sins by faith in the blood of 
Christ. 

And then look on our hypocrites, which in like maimer 
following the doctrine of Aristotle, and other heathen 
pagans, have against all the Scripture set up freewill again, 
unto whose power they ascribe the keeping of the coni- 
niandments of God. For they have set up wilful poverty 
of another manner than any is commanded of God. And 
the chastity of matrimony utterly de6ed, they have set up 
another wilful chastity^ not required of God, which they 
swear, vow, and profess to give God, whetlier he will give 
it them or no, and compel all their disciples tliereunto, 
saying that it is in the power of every man's freewill to 
observe it, contrary to Christ and his apostle Paul, 

And the obedience of God and man excluded, they have 
vowed another wilful obedience condemned of all the 
Scripture, which they will yet give God whether he will or 
will not. 

And what is become of their wilful poverty ? hath it 
not robbed tlie whole world, and brought all under tliem 1 
Can there be either king, or emjseror, or of whatsoever 
degree it be, except he will hold of them, and be sworn 
unto them to be their servant, to go and come at their lust, 
and to defend their quarrels be they false or true, l^heir 
\^ itful poverty hath already eaten up the whole world, and 
is yet still greedier then ever it was, in ao much thai ten 
worlds more were not enough to satisfy the hunger thereof. 

Moreover besides daily corrupting of otlier nieifs %vives 
and o|)en whoredom, unto what abominations, too filthy 
to Ije sjtoken of, hath their vokmtaiy^ chastity brought 
tfaem / 



I 



TritfDALl.] 



FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES. 



3!> 



And as for their wilful obedience, wliat is it but the 
disobedience and the defiance both of all the laws of God 
»nd man ; insomuch that if any prince begin to execute 
any law of man u|K>n ilwrn^ they curse him nnto the bottom 
of hell, aud proclaim him no right king, and that his lords 
ought no longer to obey him^ aud interdict his common 
people as they were lieatlieu Turks or Saracens. And 
if any man preacli them God's law, him they make an 
heretic and burn him to ashe,^. And instead of God*s law 
:md man's, they have set up one of tlieir own imagination, 
which they obser\'e with diipeasations. 

And yet in tliese work a they have $o great confidence 
that they not only trust to be saved thereby^ and to be 
higher in heaven tlian they that be saved through Christ, 
but also promise to all other forgiveness of their sitis, 
lltrough the merits of the same ; wherein they rest, and 
teach others to rest alwo, excluding tlie whole world from 
the rest of forgiveness of sins through faith in Christ's 
lilood. 

And now seeing that faith only letteth a man in unto 
rest, and unbelief excludeth him, what la the cause of 
this unbelief? verily no sin tliat the world seeth, but 
a pope-holiness, and a rightcou»«nes!$ of their own iinagi- 
oation^ as Paul saith, Kom. jt* They be ignorant of 
the righttxiusness wherewith God justi6eth, aud have set 
up a righteousness of their own making, through which 
they be disobedient unto the righteousness of God, Ami 
Christ relmketh not the Pharisees for gross sins which 
the world saw, but for those holy deeds which so bleared 
the eyes of the world, that they were taken as Gods ; 
even for long prayers, for fasting, for tithing so diligently 
that they left not ^q much as their herbs untythed, for their 
cleanness hi washing before meat, aud for wasliing of cups^ 
dishes, and all maimer [of] vessels, for building the prophets' 
sepulchres, and for keeping the holy day, and for turning 
I he heathen unto the faith, and for giving of alms. For 
unto such holy deeds they ascribed righteousness, and 



wnrui 

ebAstity ii 

wilful 
trickeilQcas. 



The pApisii 
wilful obc- 
diiiQce ]» 

diBobedi- 
Knee to ail 
princes. _ 



Ouf rigbte- 

romcth 
not by o HIT 
merUs, liut 
tbrotigh 
faith ^ by 
the blood f»f 
our Saviour 
Jetuft 
ChrlBt, 



Faith only 
bringetb ua 
to Chriat, 
ftnd unbe- 
lief bring-- 
etb U9I (rum 
CbrUt. 



Clirisit re- 
buked the 
PhuriBce^ 
for tlieir 
holy niicl 
hypocriti- 
cal detdri. 

The Phnri- 
fteefi nscribe 
rightcoujj' 
Hess to 
wofkii and 
thereft^re 
were con- 
deinned of 
ChriBt. 



40 



PU0LOGUE3 TO THE 



[Ttndai^e. 



Tlic jiiali- 
fying of 
oiirsclvi'*, 
makctU thi? 
(itfvjl more 
husiy Ihnn 
h* would 
be. 



Whal is 
tni^iint In 
lite Scrip - 
lure b^ Ibis 

liinci- 



Merit moa. 
gvrs I he 
toorL* Ibclr 
hlindtjC'is 
i» relinked, 
I be more 
ibcy rtliel 

CUrbl jind 
bii gf>»peK 

Tlic doe- 
trine of Elie 
Pbnrist'ca, 
uml tlic 
dorlrinc f\t 
our PaplsU 
po well 
agree. 



therefore when Uie righteous ne^is of God was preached 
unto them they could not but persecute it, the devil wi^ 
so strong in them : which thing Christ well describethy 
(Luke xi*) sayings '* That after the devil is cast out, he 
cometh again, and Hndeth his house swept, and made 
gay, and then taketh seven worse than himself and dwellelh 
therein, and so is the tud of that man worse than the be- 
ginning/^ That IS; when they be a Utile cleansed from 
gross sins which die world seeth, and th«n made ga^^ in 
their own sight, with the righteousness of traditions, then 
cometh seven, that is to say the wliole [>ower of the devil : 
for seven with die Hebrews signi£eth a multitude without 
number, and the extremity of a tiring, and is a speech 
borrowed { I suppose) 6nt of Leviticus, where is so oft 
mention made of seven* Where I would say, 1 will 
punish thee, that all the world shall take an ensample of 
thee ; Uiere the Jew would say, *' I will circumcise thee 
or baptize thee seven time»/^ And so here by seven is 
meant all the devils of hell, and all the might and power 
of the devih For unto what furtiier blindness could all 
the devils in hell bring them, than to make them believe 
that tliey were justified through their own good works? 
For when they once believed tliat they were purged from 
their sins, and made righteous through their own holy 
works, what room was there left fur the righteousness 
that is in Christ's bloodshedding 1 And therefore when 
timy be fallen into tliis blindness, they cannot but hate 
and persecute the light* And the more clear and evidently 
their deeds be rebuked, the furiouser and maliciouser 
blind are they, until they break out into open blasphemy 
and sinning against the Holy Gho«t, whicli is the malicious 
persecuting of the clear truth so manifestly proved, that 
they cannot once hish against it. Aa die Pharisees perse- 
cuted Christ, because he rebuked their holy deeds. And 
when he proved his doctrine with the Scripture and miracles^ 
yet though they could not improve liim, nor reason against 
him, they taught thnt the Scripture must have some other 




TrUDA^LE.] 



FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES. 



A 



meatiiDg, because liis interpretation undermined tlieir 
faundatiotij and plucked up by the roots the sects which 
tbej had planted^ and they ascribed also liis miracles to 
the devil* And in like manner though our hypocrites 
cannot deny but thh h the Scripture^ yet because there 
can Im no other sense gathered thereof, but that over- 
throweth their buildings, therefore they ever think that 
it batli some other meaning than as the words sounds and 
that no man understandelh it, or understood it since tlie 
time of the afiostles. Or if they think that some ttiat 
vrrote upon it since the apostles understcK)d it, they 
yet tliink tlutt we in like maimer as we understand not 
the text itself, so we understand not the meaning of tlie 
words of that Doctor. For when diou layest the justi* 
fying of holy works, and denyest the justifying of faith, 
how canst tbou uuderstand St* Paul, Peter, John and the 
Acts of the Apostles, or any Scripture at all^ seeing the 
justifying of faith is almost all that they intend to prove ? 
i'^inatlyi concerning vows, vihereof thou readest in the 
%%%th cliapter, Uiere may be many questions, whereunto 
I answer shortly, that we ought to put salt to all our of* 
feiings ; tliat is, we ought to minister knowledge in all our 
works, and to do notliing whereof we could not give a 
reason out of God's words* We be now in the daylight, 
and all the secrets of God, and all his counsel and will is 
opened unto us, and He that was promised should come 
atid bless ns, is come already, and liatli shed his blood for us, 
and hath blessed us with all maimer [of] blessings, and hath 
obtained all grace for us, and in him we have alL Where- 
fore God henceforth will receive no more sacrifices of 
beasts of us as thou readest, Heb, x. If thou burn 
nnto God tlie blood or fat of beasts, to obtain forgiveness 
of auis thereby, or that God should* the better hear thy 
request, then ihou dost wrong unto the bhxxl of Christ, 
and Christ unto thee is dead in vain* For in him God 
liftth promised not forgiveness of sins only, but also what- 
soever we ask to keep us from sin and temptation withal. 



cnnnot A- 
wKf irith 

jwstifica- 
lion by 
faith. 



Of rowu 



Go J wr- 
ceplelK for 
lis none 
other tacri- 
fice but 
only JejiQ^ 
ClifiBi hia 
Soil* 



4^ 



PROLOGUES TO THE 



[TrNDALE.. 



All lioli- 
nesei in our 

□JitiDn b a 
robliing of 



Faith fol- 
loweth re- 

{HfIllAIl<:« of 



Repcfitfttire 
goetlt be- 
tort frntin 
»fid prepa- 
retli tbe 
way ttato 
Cfamt, 



And what if diou bum IVankt licence unto him, what if 
thoif buru a candle^ what if thou bum lliy chastity, or 
\irgimty auto him for the same purpose, dost thou not 
hkti rebuke unto Christ's blood { Moreovefj if dioii 
offer gold^ silver, or any otiier good for the same intent, 
is there any difference I And even so if tJiou go lu pil- 
grimage, or fustest, or goest woolward, or spritdclest thyself 
with holy water, or cbe whal.'foever deed it b, or obser^est 
whatsoever ceremony it be, for like meaning, then it is 
like abomi nation. We must therefore bring tlie a alt of 
tlie knowledge of God's word with all our sacriiiees, or 
else we shall make no sweet savour unto God thereof* 
Thou wilt ask me^ shall I vow nolliing at all i yes, God^s 
commandment which thou hast vowed in thy baptism, 
X'or wliat intent ? verily for the love of Chriat which hath 
bought thee with his blood, and made thee son and heir of 
Gocl ^^ilh him, tliat thou shouldest wait on his will and 
commandments, and purify thy members according to the 
same doctrine that hath purified ttiine heart; for if the 
knowleilge of God's word hatli not puriAed thine heart so 
that thou CO use n test unto the law of God that it is riglt^ 
teous and good, and sorrowest diat diy members move tliee 
unto the contrary, so hast diou no part with Christ. For 
if tliou repent not of thy sin, so it is imp'issibte that thou 
shouldest believe that Christ had delivered thee from the 
danger thereof. If tliou believe not that Christ hath de- 
livered diee, so is it impossible that thou shouldest love 
God^s commaiuhfnents. If thou love not the command- 
ments, so is Christ'!* spirit not in thee^ w Inch is the earnest 
of forgiveness of sin, and of salvation. 

For Scripture teacheth, first repentance, then faith in 
Chriat, tliat for his sake sin is forgiven to them tliat repent; 
then good works, which arc nothing save the commandment 
of God only. And tlie commandments are nothing else^ 
save the helping of our neighbours at dieir need, and the 
taming of our members, that they might be pure also, as the 
heart is pure tlirough hate of vice and love of virtue as, 



4 

\ 



TrwDALi;] 



FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES. 



4B 



God's word teach etli iis, which works must prociHid out of 
llie faith : that is, I must do them for llie love which I have to 
God ^ for diat great mercy wlitth he hath shewed me iu Christy 
or else I do them not in llie sight of God, And tliat I faint 
not iu the pain of tSie slaying of the sin diat is in my tlesh^ 
mine heJp is tlie iiromisc of the as^sisitance of the power of 
God^ and die comfort of tlie reward to come^ which reward 
1 ascribe unto the goodness, mercy, and truth , of the Pro- 
miser that hatli chosen me^ called me, taught me, aiid 
given me the earnest thereof, and not imlo the merits 
of my doings, or sufferings. For all that 1 ib and 
suffer is but the way to the reward, and not the deserving 
thereof, As if the king's grace slioutd promisee me to defend 
me at home iu mine oun reahn, yet the way thither is 
through the s«ij wlierein 1 might haply suft'er no little 
trouble. And yet for all that, if I might live in rest when 
1 come tliitheri 1 would think , and so woidd others say, 
that my pains were well rewarded ; which reward and be- 
nefit I would not proudly ascribe unto tlie merits of my 
pains taken by the way, but unto the goodness, merci- 
fulnessp and constant truth of the king's grace whose gift 
it is, and to whom the praise and thanks thereof belongeth 
of duty and right. So now a reward is a gift given freely 
of the goodness of the giver, and not of the deseriings of 
the receiver. Thus it appeareth, that if I vow whatsoever 
it be, for any other purpose than to tame my members, and 
to be an en sample of virtue and edifying unto my neighbour, 
my sacrifice is unsavonr}% and clean without salt, and my 
lamp without oil, and I one of the foolish virgins, and 
shall lie shut from die feast of the bridegroom when I 
think myself mmi sure to enter in. 

If I vow voluntary poverty, this must be my pirrpose, that 
1 will be content with a competent living, which cometh 
unto me eitlier by succes.^ion of mine elders, or which I 
get truly with my labour in nnniNtring, and doing senice 
unto the ccnnmon wealth, in one uftice or in another, or in 
one occupation or other, because Uiat richei and honour 



Hour our 

gmul la tbe 
«i|flfht of 
God. 



The work 
i^Avelh not 
but the 
word* that 
lEf to iioy 
the pro* 
mJEe. 



An iipt ^U 
milititdH 
for ri'irartt 
of good 
worki. 



All Fowi 
must be 
made tar 
the morti- 
fying or 
taming of 
our tn^fiT' 
befa, ar t|i« 
edifying of 
onrneip^h- 
ImnrSi or 
eJ*e they 
BTc wicke<l. 

How we 
ought to 
row wtifiil 
poifcrty* 



44 



PROLOGUES TO THE 



[Tyndalb 



Whether 

fidLit:il Ifae 
Pope*fi pre- 
lates wilh. 
Ibitf net qw 



Onr irorkB 
do not 

the wiiwlom 
of man but 
in l]ie |TOW^ 
erof Gild* 



shall not corrupt my mind, and dmw mine lie art from God, 
and to give an example of virtue and edifying unto other^ 
and that my neighbour may have a living by me ai well 
as L If I make a cloak of dissimulation of my vow, laying 
a net of feigned beggary to catch superfluous abundance 
of riches J and high degree and authority^ and through the 
estimation of false holiness, to feed and maintain my 
slothful idleness with the sweat, labour, lands, and rents 
of other men (after ihe example of our spiritual] t}') robbing 
them of their faiths, and Goil of his honour ; turning unto 
mine hypocrisy that confidence, which should be given unto 
the promises of God only, am I not a wily fox^ and a ra- 
vening wolf in a Iambus skin, and a painted sepulchre fair 
without and filthy within 1 In like manner though t seek 
no worldly promotion there by , yet if I do it to be justified 
therewidi, and to get an higher place in heaven, thinking 
that I do it of my own natural strength, and of die natural 
pow er of my freewill, and diat every man hadi might even 
so to do, and tlial they do it not is Uieir fault and neg- 
ligence, and so with the proud Pharisee in comparison of 
myself despise the sinful Publicans ; w hat other thing, 
do I than eat the blood and fat of my sacrifice, devouring 
that myself which should be offered unto God alone, and 
his Christ ? And shortly, whatsoever a man doth of his 
natural gif^s, of his natural wit, wisdom, understanding, 
reason, will, and good intent, before he be otherwise and 
clean contrary taught of God's Spirit, and have received 
oUier wit, understanding, reason and will ; is flesh, worldly 
and wrought in abominable blindness, with which a man 
can but s^k himself, his own profit, glory and honour, 
even in very spiritual matters. As if I were alone in a 
wilderness, where no man were to seek profit or praise of, 
y€t^ if I would seek heaven of God there, I could of mine 
own natural gifts seek it no other ways then for llie merits 
and desen-ings of my good works, and to enter llierein by 
another way than by the door Christ, which were very theft, 
for Christ is Lord over all, and whatsoever any man will 



1 



TTr?*i>ALfi.] 



Fl\^ BOOKS OF MOSES. 



4S 



hmve of God, he must have it given him freely for Christ's 
»ftke. Now to have heaven for mine owii deservitigj is 
mine own praise aad tiot Clirist's ; for 1 cannot have it by 
favour and grace in Christ, and by mine o^in merits also ; 
for free giving and deferring cannot stand together, 

If thou v^ilt vow^ of thy goods unto God^ Uioii must put 
salt unto this sacrifice ; that is, thou must tnintster knowledge 
in this deed as Peter teacheth, 2 Pet. U Thou must put 
oil of Code's ward in tliy lamp, and do it according to 
luiow ledge, if tiiou wait for tlie coming of the bridegioom 
to enter ux w ith him into his rest. But thou perad venture 
wilt hang it about the image to move men to devotion. 
Devotion is a fenent love unto Gad's commandments, 
Slid a desire to be with God and with his eveiiastiitg pra- 
mises. Now shall the sight of such riches as are shewed 
at St, Thomas's shrine, or at Wabingham, move a man 
to love the commandments of God better, and to desire to 
be loosed from his flesh and to be with God ; or shall it 
not rather make his poor lieart sigh, because lie hath no 
such at home, and to wish part of it in another place ? 
The priest shall have it in God's stead. Shall the priest 
have it ? if the priest be bought with Christ^s blood, theu 
he IS Christ *s sen ant and not his own, and ought therefore 
to feed Christ's flock with Christ's doctrine, and to 
minister Chris t*s sacraments unto them purely for very love, 
and not for til thy lucre's sake, or to be Lord over them as 
Peter teacheth, I Pet. v,, and Paul, Acts xx. Beside this 
Christ b ours, and is a gift given us, and we be heirs of 
Christ and of all tliat is Christs. Wherefore the priests, 
doctrine is ours, and we heirs of it^ it is the food of our 
souls. Therefore if he minister it not truly and freely 
unto us without selling, he is a thief, and a soul murderer: 
aad eve» so is he if he take upon him to feed us^ and have 
not wherewith. And for a Uke conclusion, because we also 
widi all that we have, be Christ's, therefore is the priest 
heir with us also of al! that we have received of God ; 
wherefore inasmuch as the priest waiteth on the word of 



Desert, HAd 

free gift 
Hrc conCm- 



Tbe sight 
of riche!>, 
la rMtbera 
eanse of 

coretouD- 
ivefls tbnn « 
mpaji to 
bofioiir 



WhplWr 
dill tlie Ph. 
liLaUi ao or 

Tio } 



4^ 



PROLOGUES TO THE 



[TVKPALB. 



Yet the 
iipirihinLl- 

wmt more 
ib&D their 
BUnding 



A grxkd 
raw id U> 
keep God*! 

mean. 



How iJinu 
mnpt law- 
fully jf^o on 
pIlgriniAge. 



Gtid hear* 
eCh nil thftt 

him in dl 
titnei and 
At all places 
alike. 



God, and is our seniaat iherein, therefore of right we are 
Ilia debtors^ aiid owe bim a sufticieitt living of our goods, 
aud even thereto a wife of our daughters owe we unto liim 
if he require her* And uow when we have appohited hirn 
a sufficient living, whether in tithes^ rents^ or in yearly 
wages, he ought to be content and to require no more, 
nor yet to receive any more, but to be an ensaniple of 
soberness and of despising worldly things unto the ensam- 
ple of his parishioners. 

Wilt thou vow to <>fllT unto the jjoor people ? tliat is 
pleasant in the sight of God, for they he left here to do 
our alms upon in Christ's stead, and they be the right heit^ 
of all our abundance and overplus. Moreover we must 
have a school to teach God's word iti (though it needelh 
not to be so costly) aud therefore it is lawful to vow unto 
tlie building or uiainte nance thereof, and uuto the helping 
of all good works. And we ought to vow to pay custom, 
toll, rent, and all manner [of ] duties, and whatsoever we owe ; 
for tliat is God*s comniaudment, 

If thou wilt vow^ pilgrimage, thou must put salt thereto, 
in like manner, if it shall be accepted, if tliou vow to go 
and %isit the poor, or to hear God's word, or whatsoever 
edifieth thy soul unto love and good work after knowledge, 
or whatsoever God commandeth, it is well done, and a 
sacriiice that savoureth well, ye will haply say, that ye 
will go to tins or that place, because God hatli chosen one 
place more than an other, aud will hear your peUtion 
more in one place Uian another* As for your prayer it 
must be according to God's word. Ye may not desire 
God to take vengeance on him whom God*i5 word teacheth 
you to pity and to pray for. And as for die other gloss, 
that God will hear you more mone place then in another, 
I suppose it sal infatuaium^ salt unsavoury, for if it were 
wisdom, how could we excuse the death of Stephen, 
Acts 7. which died for that article that God dwelleth not 
in temples made with hands we that believe in God, 
are the temple of God. Haith Paul, 'Mf a man love 



Ttki^ale.] 



FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES. 



47 



God, and keep his word, he is the temple of God, and 
bath God presently dwelling in him:** aa witnesseth Christ 
John xivthj saying J "If a man love me, he will ket^p my 
word, and then my father \\ ill love hinij and we will conie 
unto him, and dwell with him. And in the xvth he saith, 
"If ye abide in me, and my words also abide in you, then 
ask what ye will and ye shall have it," If thou believe in 
Christ and hast the promiises which God hath made thee 
in thine heart, then go on pilgrimage untri tliine own heart, 
and there pray, and Gtni will hear thee, for \m mercy and 
truth's sake^ and for his son Chris t^s sake, and not for a few 
stones* sake. What careth God for the temple 1 The 
very beasts, in that they have life in tlium, be much better 
then an heap of stones couched together. 

To speak of chastity : it is a gift not given unto all per- 
sons, as testiiiedi both Christ and also his apostle Paul, 
wherefore all persons may not vow it* Moreover there be 
causes wherefore many persons may better live chaste at 
one time than at a no die r. Many may live chaste at twenty 
ijul tliirty for certain cold diseases following tliem, which 
It forty, when their health is come, cannot do so. Many 
be occupied with wild fantasies in their youtli that titcy 
care not for marriage, wliich some when they be waxen sad 
shall be greatly def^iious : it is a dangerous thing to make 
sin where none is, and to forswear the benefit of God and 
to bind thyself under pain of damnation of thy soul, that 
thou wonldest not use the remedy that God hath created, if 
ntred required. 

Another thing is this, beware that thou get thee not a 
false feigned chastity made with the ungodly persuasions 
of St- Jerom, or of Ovid in his filthy book of the remedy 
against love, lest when through such imaginations thou 
hast utterly despised, delietl and abhorred all womankind, 
thou come into such case dirough the fierce wrath of God, 
that tliou canst neither live chaste, nor find in thy heart to 
marry, and so be compelled to fall into the abomination of 
the Poiie against nature and kind. 



God dwd- 

Ictb not in 

niftdc with 

mail's 

lianda* 

Qod re- 
g^nrdrtli tlic 
lit<arti Hnd 
not ttte 
plfwe where 
we prayp 



VVilfuT 
chastily iA 
not meet 
for ail per- 

RorvR to 

YQW. 



False fdpi- 
ed cUMtity. 



49 



PROLOGUES TO THE 



[Fyndalk. 



P 



The Pope 

tbnt whicU 
Gtui per- 
mktLs]^ nitd 
S4?ttclli nl 
liberty Hint 
which Go<l 
rarLilJeth. 



A good nJ- 
oionition to 
such ju will 



Wbereynto 
finil haw we 
should Ap- 
ply our 



How A TtiW 
b to be 



He tliAt 
fiisii^tLi to 
any other 
end thnQ to 
t»mp hiA 
IkiiIv tLat 
it iiisy 
wait upon 
Gocl^ deeei- 
verb him* 
■elf. 



Moreover, God is a wise father, and kiioweth all the 
iiiiirmttjes of his chitdretii and also merciful, atid therefore 
hath created a remedy without sin, and given thereto his 
favotir and blessing, J^et us not he wiser than God with 
our imaginations, nor tempt him ; for as godly chastity is 
not every man*s gift, even so he tliat hath it to day, hath 
not power to continue it at bis own pleasure, neither hath 
God promised to give it hitn still, and to cure his indmii- 
ties without his uatural remedy, nt* more than he hath 
promised to slake his hunger without meat, or thirst with* 
out driuk. Wherefore either let all things bide free as God 
hath created them, and neither vow that which God permit- 
ted thee with his favour and blessing also ; or else if thou 
wilt needs vow^ tlien vow godly and under a condition, that 
thou wilt continue chaste ^o long as God giveth thee that 
gift, and as long as neither thine own necessity, neither 
charity toward thy neighbour, nor the authority of them 
under whose power thou ait, drive thee unto the contrary- 

The purpose of thy vow must be salted also %iith the 
wisdom of God* Thou mayst not vow to be justified 
thereby, or to make satisfaction for thy sins, or to win 
heaven or an higher place ; for then didst thou wrong unto 
the blood of Christ, and thy vow were plain idolatry and 
abominable in the sight of God, Thy vow must be only 
unto the furtherance of the commandments of God, 
which are (as I have said) nothing but the taming of tliy , 
members, and the service of thy neighbour j that is, if 
thou think thy back too weak for the burthen of wedlock, 
and that thou canst not rule thy wife, children, servant^i 
and make provision for them godly, and without overmuch 
busying and unquieling thyself, and drowning thyself in 
worldly business unchnstianly, or that thou canst serve thy 
neighbour in some office better being chaste than married. 
And then thy vow is good and lawful And even so must 
thou vow abstinence of meats and drinks so far forth as 
it is profitable unto thy neighbours, and unto the taming 
of thy flesh ; but thou mayst vow neither of them unto 



4 

n 



I 
4 



TyndalbJ five books OF MOSES. 49 

the slaying of thy body. As Paul commandeth Timothy 
to drink wine, and no more water, because of his diseases. 
Thou wilt say that Timothy had not haply forsworn 
wine. I think the same, and that the apostles forsware 
not wedlock, though many of them lived chaste ; neither 
yet any meat or drink, though they abstained from them, 
and that it were good for us to follow their example. 
Howbeit though I vow and swear and think on none excep- All our do- 
tion, yet is the breaking of God's commandments except, |°8J ™o»t 
and all chances that hang of God. As if I swear to be honour of 
in a certain place at a certain hour, to make a loveday ^'J^'Jf'our 
without exception, yet if the king in the meantime com- neighbour. 
mand me another way, I must go by God's command- 
ment, and yet break not mine oath. And in like case if 
my father and mother be sick and require my presence, 
or if my wife, children, or household be visited that my 
assistance be required, or if my neighbour's house be a 
fire at the same hour, and a thousand such chances ; in 
^iriiich all I break mine oath, and am not forsworn and so 
forth. Read God's word diligently and with a good 
heart, and it shall teach thee all things. 



A PROLOGUE 

INTO THE FIFTH BOOK OP MOSES CALLED 
DEUTERONOMY. 



THIS is a book worthy to be r^ad in, day and night, and 
never to be out of hands. For it is the most excellent of 
all the books of Moses. It is easy also and light, and a ,^^ ^^^ 
wy pure Gospel, that is to wit, a preaching of faith and Uapreach- 
k>ve : deducing the love to God out of faith, and the .'^^loTe! 

VOL. II. E 




» 



Here tlioo 

Igamn right 
Tneditatioa 
or conl£iD> 



FROLOiiUES TO THE 



[TYNt»J.|4t£. 



Hie works 

of God arc 

■upcriuiCu- 



We ma At 
nbfitAin 
from out* 
wftrd eril 
lliilWfh noi 
for bve, 
vet for femr 
uf t^ie vcn- 
freiiD£« of 



Uoto the 

Uw of trod 

we mmy not 
Add nor di- 

cnmmnnd- 
ed to ab- 
stain from 



6tfd is tn&T~ 
dial to 
ttenthjtt 
repeat. 



love of a maii^s neighbour out oi the li>ve of God. 
Herein also thou majest learn right meditatioa or coiitem- 
|ilatioi], which is uothing else save the calliug to mind, aud 
a repeating in the hearty of the glorious and wonderful 
deeds of God» and of his terrible handling of his etiemiee 
aud merciful entreating of tiiem Uiai come when he 
caUetli thetn^ wliich tiling this book dodi, aud almost nothing 
eke. 

In the four tirit chapters he rehearsetli tlie benefits of God 
done unto them, to provoke them to love, and his mighty 
deeds done above all natural power, and beyond all natural 
capacity of faith, that they might believe God, and trust in 
liim, and in his strength. And thirdly he rehearselhthe fierce 
plagues of God u|>on his enemies, and on tliem which through 
impatience and unbelief fell from liim ; partly to tame and 
abate the appetites of tlie flesh which alway fight against 
the Spirit, and partly to bridle the wide raging lusts of tlietii 
in whom was no Spirit ; tliat though they had no power to 
do good of love, yet at the least way, they should ab- 
stain from outward evil for fear of wrath i and cruel ven- 
geance which should fall upon them and shortly find them 
out, if tliey cast up God's nurture and run at riot beyond 
his laws and ordinances. 

Moreover he chargeth them to put nought to, nor take 
ought away from God's words, but to be diligent only to 
keep them in remembrance^ and in the heart, and to teach 
their children for fear of forgetting. And to beware eitlier 
of making imager), or of bowing tliemselves unto images^ 
saying, Ye saw no image when God spake unto you, but 
heard a voice only, and that voice keep, and thereunto 
cleave^ for it is your life and it shall save you. And finally 
if (as the frailty of all fiesh is) they shall have fallen from 
God, and he have brought them into trouble, adversity, 
and cumbrance and all necessity ; yet if they repent and 
turn, he promiscth them, that God shall remember hit 
mercy, and receive tliem to grace again. 

In the fifth he repeateth the ten commandments, aud 



I 



Ty?idale ] 



FIVE UOOKS OF MOSES. 



51 



that tiiev uiiglit ^cg a cause to do them of la\e, he biddeth 
tlieni remember that they were bound in Egj^t, atui 
how God delivered tliem with a mighty hnnd, aiul a stretchoti 
out arm, to serve him, and to keep bis tommandment'i : 
as Paul saitb that we are bought with Christ's bloody and 
therefore are hifi ser\'ants, and not our own» and ought to 
mtk his wit J and honour only^ and to Love and serve one 
another for \m sake. 

In the sixth he setteih out the fountain of all com- 
mand men ts I that is^ that tliey believe how that tliere ii but 
one God that doth all, and therefore ought only to be loved 
widi d1 tlie hearty all the soul, and all the might* For 
Ime oidy is the fulfilling of the commandments, as Paul 
dso saith uuto the Romans, and Galatians likewise. He 
lAiinieth tliem also that they forget not the commandments^ 
but teach them their children, and to shew their children 
also bow God delivered them out of the bondage of the 
Egyptians, to serie him and his commandments, that the 
children might see a cause to work of love likewise. 

The seventh is altogether of faith : he removeth all oc- 
diioiis that niight withdraw^ lliem from the faith, and 
pulleth them also from all confidence in themselves, and 
stineth tliem up to trust in God boldly and only. 

Of the eighth Chapter thou seest how that the cause of 
temptation iis, that a man might see his own heart* For 
when I am bn>ught into that extremity, that I must either 
iuffer or forsake God, then I shall feel how much I believe 
and trust in himj and how much 1 love him* In like 
manner if my brother do me evil for my good, then if I 
love him when there b no cause in him^ I see that my love 
was of God, and even so if I then hate him^ I feel and 
perceive that my lo^^ wus but worldly, and finally he 
ttirreth them to the faith and lov« of God, and driveth 
them fiT»m all confidence of their own selves. 

In the ninth also he moveth them unto faitli, and to put 
their trust in God, and draweth them from confidence of 
themselves, by rehearsing all the wickedness which they 

E 2 



Christ hith 
dtflircredm 
nml (hcre^ 
fore we 
ougbt U> 
actve him 
and our 
ndghboiir 
for his 
sflke. 

Lore anly 
is Lhe ful- 
fiJling of 
thf; laws of 
OotJ. 



Wt in list 
trust only 
m God and 
not in our- 
selves. 



How » man 
may try 
and cia- 
mme bim^ 

sctf hoir 
much ht. 
loi^etU Ood 
And hU 
nvighbonr. 



God tUf 

reth up hh 
peopk unto 
fftjth. 



5E 



PROLOGUES TO THE 



[TjfM»AJ,I?, 



A riff bt way 
of prayer. 



Til* pitTi 
and effect 

Ihws of 
God. 



And if we 
lir&t lure 
God, itien 
out of tbat 
lore we 
luu&l Dceda 
love our 
neighbour. 



WbjiE it ia 
to loTc und 
fcEif Godj 
II ml what it 
h to deA- 
plse bim. 



The word 
of God 
may not be 
filtered. 

Let no man 
draw ua 
from God's 
word. 



had wrouglit from the first day he knew them unto that 
same day. And in the end he repeateth how he conjured 
God ill Horeb, atid overcame him with prayeri wJiere thou 
ma) est learn tlie right muatier to pray. 

In the tenth he reckoneth up the pith of all laws^ and 
the keeping o( the la^v in the heart ; whicli is ttj fear God, 
love him and serve hiiu with all tlieir hearty soul and mighty 
and keep his commandments of love. And he sheweth a 
reasoti wh}^ they should that do : even because God la 
Lord of heaven and earth, and hath also done all for them 
of his own goodness without their deserving. And then 
otit of the Jove unto God, he bringetli the love unto a 
mail's neighbour saying, God is Lord above all lords and 
loveth all his servants indifferently, as well tlie poor and 
feeble^ and the stranger, as tlie rich and mighty^ and there- 
fore will that we love the poor and t^ie stranger. And he 
addeth a cause, For ye were strangers, and God deliveted 
you, and hath brought you unto a laud where ye be at 
home. Love die stranger therefore for his sake* 

In the eleventh he exhortelh them to love and fear God^ 
and reheersetli tlie terrible deeds of God upon his euemies, 
and on them that rebelled against him. And lie tei^titieth 
unto them both what will follow, if they love and fear 
God, and what also if they despise hmij and break his 
commaudnient. 

In the twelfth he coinmaiideth to put out of die way all 
that miglit be an (occasion to hurt the faith, and forbiddeth 
to do ought after their own minds, or to alter the word of 
God. 

In the tliirteenth he forbiddetli to hearken unto ought wave 
unto God's word : no, though he which counselleth contrary 
should come with miracles, as Paul doth unto the Galatians. 

In the fourteenth the be;ists are forbidden, partly for 
un cleanness of them^ and partly to cause hale between 
the heathen and tlieni, that they have no conversation 
together, in tliat one abhorreth what the other eateth. Unto 
this fifteenth chapter all pertain unto faith and love chiefly. 





TtisDJitf;.] 



FIVE BOOKS OF MOSES. 



53 



And m this tifteetuli^ he beginnetb to eitlreat more spe- 
cially of things permiiiiTtg unto the cominon wealthy and 
equity, and exhorleth uulu the love of a man's neighbour* 
And in ihe sixteenth among other he forgetteth not the 
same. And tn the seventeenth he entreatelh of right and 
cquitj' chiefly, in so much tliat when !ie looketh mito faith 
and unto the punishment of idolaterSj he yet endeth in a 
law of love and equity: forbidding to condemn any man 
under less than t^o witnesses at the least, and commandeth 
to bring the trespasser unto the open gate of the city, 
where all men go in and out, that all men might hear the 
cause and see that he had but right* But Uie Pope hath 
found a better way^ even to opposie him without any accuser 
and that secretly, that no man know whether he have right 
or noj either hear liis articles or answer ; for fear lest the 
people should search whether it were so or no* 

In the eighteenth he forbiddeth all false and devilish 
crafts that hurt true faith. Moreover because the people 
could not hear the voice of the law spoken to them in fire, 
be promiseth them another prophet tu bring tliem better 
tidings^ which was spoken of Christ our Saviour, 

The nineteenth, and so forth utito the end of the twenty- 
seventh, is almost altogether of fove unto our neighbours, 
and of law», of equity and honesty, with now and then 
a respect unto faitli, 

^rhe twenty-eightli is a terrible chapter, and to be trem- 
bled at : a christian man's heart might well bleed for sorrow 
at the reading of it, for fear of the wrath that is like to 
come upon us, according unto all the curses which thou 
there teadest. For according unto this curse hath God 
dealt with all nations, after they were fallen into the abomi- 
nations of blindness* 

Tlie twenty-ninth is like terrible, with a godly lesson in 
the end that we should leave searching of God's secrets, and 
give diligence to walk according to that he hath opened 
nntu OS* For the keeping of the commandments of God 
U^achetb wisdom as thou mayest see in the same chapter. 



or tuaUei'a 
of Uic com- 
monwi-jtl- 



Nanc tnny 
undtT Itiro 



Cbf i<;t *»«r 
SiivifJiir ile- 
cLnri'd in 
theUhl 
Tcstamuit. 



Tbr cuFjte 
and wfalli 

over uH 
tlicse I lint 
brcHk hilt 



Wc mny 
not be too 

lag of 
God's 3ie- 
crcts, but 
ratber atu* 



M 



PROLOGUE TO THE 



[Tyndalb. 



dy to un- 
derstand 
and to do 
our dnty 
towards 
God and 
our neigh- 
bour. 



where Moses saith. Keep the commandmentB, that ye may 
understand what ye ought to do. But to search God's 
secrets, blindeth a man, as is well proved by. the swarms 
of our sophisters, whose wise books are now when we look 
in the Scripture, found but full of foolishness. 



THE PROLOGUE OF 



THE PROPHET JONA& 



The Papists 
keep the 
Scriptures 
from the 
lay'people, 
hecause 
they only 
will be the 
publishers 
and exposi- 
tors there- 
of. 



The Scrip- 
ture hath a 
bodv and a 
soul. 



AS the envious Philistines stopped the wells of Abraham, 
and filled them up with earth, to put the memorial out 
of mind, to the intent that they might challenge the ground ; 
even so the fleshly minded hypocrites stop up the veins of 
life which are in the Scripture, with the earth of their tra- 
ditions, fake similitudes, and lying allegories ; and that of 
like zeal, to make the Scripture their own possession and 
merchandise, and so shut up the kingdom of heaven, which 
is God's word; neither entering in themselves, nor suffer- 
ing them that would. 

The Scripture hath a body without, and within a soul, 
spirit, and life. It hath without a bark, a shell, and as it 
were an hard bone for the fleshly minded to gnaw upon. 
And within it hath pith, kernel, marrow, and all sweetness 
for God's elect which he hath chosen, to give them his 
Spirit, and to write his law, and the faith of his son in their 
hearts. 



TvMDALK.] 



PROPHEr JONAS. 



55 



Th€ Scripture containeth three things in it j iirst, the 
law, to condemn all tiesh ; secondarilyi the gospel, that is 
tD say promises of mercy for all that repent and acknow- 
ledge their sins, at the preaching of the law, and consent 
in their hearts that the law is good, and submit them selves 
to be scholars to learn to keep tlie law, and to learn to 
believe the mercy that is promised theoi ; and thirdlyi the 
stories and lives of those scholars, both what chances for- 
tuned them, and also by what means their schoolmaster 
taught them and made them per feet j and how he tried the 
true from the false. 

When the h}*pocrite!i come to the law, they put glosses 
loo, and make no more of it than of a worldly law which 
i« lati^fied %vitli the ontward work, and which a *l\irk may 
ili*o fulfil. When yet God^s law never ceaseth to condemn 
a man^ until it be written in his heart, and until he keep 
it naturally without compubion^ and all other respect^ save 
oidy of pure love to God and his neighbour, as he natu- 
rally eateth vihen he is an hungred without compulsion, 
and all other respect, save to slake his hunger only* And 
when they come to the gospel, there they mingle their 
leaven and say, God now receive th us no more to mercy, 
hut of mercy receiveth us to penance, that is, to wit, holy 
deeds that make them fat bellies, and us their captives 
Iwith in soul and body. And yet they feign their idol the 
Pope so merciful, that if that thou make a little money 
glister in his Balaam's eyes, there is neither penancej nor 
purgaton', nor any fasting at all^ but to fly to heaven as 
swift as a iJiought, and at the twinkling of an eye. 

And the lives, stories and gifts of men, which are con- 
tained in the Bible they read as things no more pertaining 
unto tliem, than a tale of Robin Hood, and as tilings they 
wot not whereto they serve, save to feign false descant and 
juggling allegories tostablish their kingdom withaL And 
one of the chiefest and fleshliest studies they have, is to 
magnify tiie saints above measure, and above the truth ; 
and with their poetry to make them greater then ever Gtxi 



The Scrip- 
ture con- 

tbrec 
tbifiga- 



The iniia- 

ner of liy- 
pocntL'S ill 
rcadkig tlie 
bw of God' 



Hie pupit- 
tital II nd 
corrupt 
doctrjiic of 
tbe Fapbt». 



How the 
Papbtfi 
wring and 
wrest tUc 
Scripttiri£&. 



kn 



raOLOGUE TO THE 



[Tyniulc. 



made them. And if tlie^ liud any infirmity, or sin ascribed 
unto the saints^ that they excutie with all diligence^ dimi- 
nishing the glory of the mercy of God^ and robbing 
wretched sititiers of all their comfort ; and think thereby 
to Batter the saints, and to obtain their favour ainl to make 
special advocates of tliem^ even a^ a man woud obtain 
the favour of worldly tyrants : as they also feign the saints 
more cruel than ever was any heatlien man, and more 
wreakful and vengeable tlien the poets feign their Gods or 
their furies tliat torment the souls iiihell^ if their evens be not 
fasted, and their images visited and saluted with a pater- 
noster, which prayer only our lips be acquainted with, 
our hearts understanding none at all, and worshipped with 
a candle, and the oflering of our devotion in the place 
which they have chosen to hear supplications, and make 
petitions of their clients therein. 

But thou reader, think of the law of God, how that it 
IS altogether spiritual, and so spiritual that it is never ful- 
filled with deeds or works, until they flow out of tltine 
heart, with as great love toward thine neighbour, for no 
deserving of his, yea though he be thine enemy, as Christ 
loved thee, and died for thee, for no deserving of thine 
but even when thou wast his enemy* And in the mean 
time, throughout all our infancy and childhood in Christ, 
till we be grown up into perfect men, in tlie full knowledge 
of Christ, and full love of Christ again, and of our neigh- 
bours for his sake after the ens ample of his love to us, re- 
membering that the fulfilling of the law is, a fast faith 
in Christ*s blood coupled with our profession, and sub- 
mit ourselves to do better. 

And of the gospel or promises which thou meetest in 
the Scripture^ believe fast that God will fulfil them unto 
thee, and that unto the uttermost jot, at the repentance of 
thine heart, when thou turnest to him and forsakest evil, 
even of his goodness and fatherly mercy unto thee, and not 
for thy flattering him with hypocritish works of thine own 
feigning. So that a fast faith onl^v, without respect of all 





Ttndale.] 



PROPHET JONAS, 



tr 



works, is tke forgiveness botJj of the sin nhich we did in 
time of ignorance, with lust and consent to sin ; and also 
of chat sin which we do by chance, and of frailty, after that 
we are come to knowledge, and have professed tlie law out 
of our hearts. And all deeds serve only for to help our 
l^igbbours, and to tame our flesh, that we fall not to sin 
again ; tind to exercise our souls in virtNC^ and not to make 
satisfaction to Godward for the sin that is once past* 

And all otlier stories of the Bible^ witliont exception, 
are the practising of the law and of the gospel ; and are 
true and faithful ens am pies, and sure earnest that God will 
even so deal with us, as he did willi them, in all iniirmities, 
ia all temptations, and in all like cases and chances* VVhereiu 
ye see oo the one side how fatlierly and tenderly, and with 
;ill compassion God entreateth his elect, which submit 
ihemselves as scholurH, to learn tt> walk in tlie ways of 
liis laws, and to keep them of love. If they forgat them- 
i^lves at a time, he would stir them up again with alt mercy ; 
if they fell and hurt them.^elves, he healed them again with 
all compassion and tenderness of heart. He hath oft 
brought great tribulation and adversity upon his elect ; but 
all of fatlierly love only, to teach diem, and to make tliem 
iee their own hearts, and the sin that tliere lay hid, tliat 
they might afterward feel his mercy ; for his mercy waited 
tipon theni, to rid them out again, as soon as they were 
learned, and come to the knowledge of their own hearts ; 
so that he never cast man away, how deep soever he had 
ninned, save tiiem only which had first cast the yoke of his 
laws ^m their necks, widi utter defiance, and malice of 
heart. 

Which ensamples how comfortable are they for us 
nhen we be fallen into sin, and God is come upon us 
with a scourge, that we despair not * but repent with full 
hope of mercy, after the ensamples of mercy that are gone 
before. And therefore they were written for our learning, 
as testifietli Paul, (Rom* xv,) to comfort us, that we 
might the better put our hope and trust in God, when we 



Ood cor* 
rectfth 
wberp tie 
lore til. 



God ca^teth 
notie away 
but Krich u 
irfii**! to 
keep bia 
Uw9, and 
will not 
bearkvn 
iiDto hii 
voice^ 



m 



PROLOGUE TO THE 



[TfliDALE. 



r 



Such u 

tkeir betuii, 
And not 

the will of 
G0d to do 
It, 6<»d 
CBitetIi out. 



The pro- 
phets of 
God bare 
the weak-' 
neas of 
their bre- 
tbri?n, ami 
ihdr in- 
juries also 
with pt« 
tience^ 

The Pcip« 
atid his* 
ministers 
prrseeutora 
are over 
ibeir bre- 
threiii^ 



see how merciful he hath been in times past utito our 
wenk brethreiij that are gone before in all their adver- 
iities, need, tetnptmtions, yea, and horrible ains into which 
they now and then fell. 

And on the other side, ye see how they that hardened 
their hearts, and thinned of malice, and refilled mercy thut 
was offered them, and had no power to repent, perished 
£tt the latter end with all confusion and shame mercilessly. 
Which ensamptes are very good and necessary to keep us 
in awe and dread in time of prosperity ; as thou mayeat 
see by Paul, 1 Cor* x. that we abide in the fear of God, 
and wax not wild and fall to vanities, and so sin and 
provoke God, and bring wrath upon us. 

And thirdly, ye see in the practice how as God is 
merciful and long-suffering ; even so were all his true 
prophets and preachers, bearing the inhnmities of their 
weak brethren, and their own wrongs and injuries with 
all patience and long-suffering, never casting any of them 
off their backs, until they sinned against the Holy Ghost, 
maliciously persecuting tlie open and manifest trnth : 
contrary unto the ensample of the Pope, which in winning 
agninst God, and to queuch the truth of his Holy Spirit, 
is ever chief captain and trumpet blower to set other at 
work, and seeketh only his own freedom, liberty, privi- 
lege, wealth, prosperity, profit, pleasure, pastime, honour 
and glory, with the bondage, thraldom, captivity, misety, 
\*Tretchednesa, and vile subjection of his brethren : and in 
his own cause is so fervent, so stiff and cruel, tliat he will 
not suffer one word spoken against his false majesty, wily 
inventions, and juggling hypocrisy to be unavenged, 
tliough all Christendom should be set together by the ears, 
and should cost^ he cared not how many hundred thounastd, 
their lives , 

Now that thou mayest read Jonas fruitfully, and not as 
a poet's fable, but as an obligation between God and thy 
soul ; as an earnest penny given thee of God, that he will 
help thee in time of need, if thou turn to him ; and as the 




TTK&Atl.] 



PROPHET JONAS. 



bO 



word of God the only food and life of thy soul, this mark 
and note. Firsts count Jonas the friend of God, and a 
man choaen of Godj to tes^tify his name unto the world : 
but yet a young scholar, weak aud rude, after the fashion 
of the apostles while Christ was yet with them bodily , 
winch, though Christ ever yet taught them to be meek, 
and to humble themselves, yet oft strove among them- 
selves who iiihould be greatest* The aons of Zebedee 
would !iit the one on the right hand of Christ, the other 
on ^e left* They would pray that fire might descend 
from heaven and consume the Samaritans. When Chriiit 
asked, Whu suy men that I am ? Peter answered, Thou 
ait the Son of the living God ; as though Peter had been 
as perfect as an angel. But mime di ate ly afters when 
Christ preached unto them of bis death and passion^ 
Peter was angry and rebuked Christy and thought earnestly 
that be had raved, and not wist what he said ; as at another 
time^ when Christ was so fervently busied in healing tlie 
people that he had no leisure to eat, tliey went out to hold 
himi suppofiing that he had been beside himself. Aud 
one that cast out devils in Christ's name they forbade, 
because he waited not on them, so glorious were they yet. 
And tliough Christ taught alway to forgive^ yet Peter 
after long going to school, asked whether men should for- 
gave seven times, thinking Uiat eight times had been too 
iDlldi» And at the last supper Peter would have died 
with Chriat i but yet within few hours after he denied 
him, both cowardly and shamefully. And after the same 
maimer, though he had so long heard that no man might 
avenge himself, but rather turn the otlier cheek too, than to 
ttnite agam ; yet wlien Clirist was in taking, Peter asked 
whether it were lawful to smite with the sword, and 
tarried none answer, but laid on rashly. So that though 
when we come first unto knowledge of the truth, and the 
peace is made between God and us, and we love his laws, 
and believe and trust in him as in our Father^ and have good 
hearts unto him, and be born anew in the Spirit, yet we 



TUe cruel 

opitibn 
thai thf! 

hmdof 
CbrbL 



r&Dc« Aiid 
impcrfec- 
rion of ttie 
apostles. 



00 



PROLOGUE TO THE 



[TrKUAi^ir* 



God doth 
mercifuliy 
iry And 
t^mpC IJ9 iQ 
more fit to 
utUif oiir 
heiirl» atid 
minds tcv- 
wards him. 



Jonaa of 

himself 
was nn uq- 
nicet mes- 
Hcnger lo 
be sent of 



bal God at - 

tiflteU him 
with hb 
Holy SpiriL 



are but children and joung scholars^ weak and feeble ; 
and must have leisure to grow in the Spirit, in knoi/^ledge, 
love, and in the deeds thereofj as young children must 
have time to grow it) their bodies* 

And God our Father and schoolmaster feedetli vks^ and 
teacheth us according unto the capacitj^ of our stomachs, 
and maketli us to grow and wax peifect, and tineth and 
trieth us as gold in the fire of temptations and tribulations ; 
as Moses witnesseth, (Dent* viii.) sayiag^ " Remember 
all the way by which the Lord thy God carried thee this 
forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee and to tempt 
or provoke thee, that it might be know^ what were in 
thine heart* He brought thee into advemty, and made 
thee an hungred, and then fed tliee with manna, which 
neither ihuu nor yet thy fathers ever knew of; to teach 
that man liveth not by bread only, but by all that pro- 
ceedeth out of the mouth of God." For the promises of 
God are life unto liU that cleave unto them, much more 
than is bread and bodily sustenance ; as the journey of the 
children of krael out of Egypt into the land promised 
them, ministereth thee notable ensamples, and that abun- 
dantly, as doth all the rest of the Bible also* Howbeit, it 
is impossible for flesh to believe, and to trust in the truth 
of God's promises, until he have learned it in much tribu- 
lation^ after that God hath delivered liim out tiiereof 
again. 

God, therefore, to teach Jonas, and to shew him his 
own heart, and to make him perfect, and to instruct us 
also by his ensampk> sent him out of the land of Israel 
where he was a prophet, to go among the heathen people, 
and to the greatest and mightiest city of the world then, 
called Niniveh, to preach that within foity days they 
should all perish for their sins, and that the city should be 
overthrown. Which message the free will of Jonas had 
as much power to do tm the weakest hearted woman in tlie 
world hath power, if she were commanded, to leap into a 
tub of living snakes and adders : as haply, if God had 




TY?fDAl,E.] 



PROPHET JONAS. 



01 



commanded Sarah tf> have sacrificed her son Isaac, as he 
did Abraham r she wouhi have disputed with him ere she 
hud done it ; or though she were strong enough^ yet many 
an holy saint could not have found in their beart^^ but would 
have run away from the presence of the commajidment of 
God| with JonaSy if they had been so strongly tempted. 

For Jonas tbouglit of this muniier : Lo, 1 am here a 
prophet unto God*s people the Israelites ; which ^ thougli 
they have God's word testified unto them daily, yet despise 
\tt and vvorsinp God under the likeness of calves, and 
alter aU manner [of] fashions, save after his own word ; 
aud therefore are of all nations tlie worst, and most 
worthy of puuishment. And yt^t God, for love of few 
that are among them^ and for liis name's sake, sparetli and 
defendeth tliem. How then should God take so cruel 
vengeance on so great a multitude « of them to whom his 
name was never preached, and therefore are not the 
tentli part so evil m these ? If I shall therefore go preachy 
so shah I lay and shame myself and God tliereto, and 
make them the more to despise God, and set the less by 
bim^ antl to be the more cruel unto his people- 

And upon diat imagination he fled from the face or 
presence of God ; diat Is, out of the country where God 
M-aj worshipped in, and from the prosecuting of God*s 
commandment ; aud tliought, I will get me another way 
aaiong the heathen people, aud be no more a prophet, but 
live at restp and out of all cunibrance. Nevertheless, the 
God of all mercy, which careth for his elect children, and 
tumeth all unto good to them, and smiteth iliem to heal 
them again, and killeth them to make tliem alive again ^ 
and playetii with them (as a father dotli sometime with his 
young ignorant children,) and tempteth them, aud provetb 
them to make them see their own hearts, provided for 
Jonas, liow^ all things should be. 

When Jonas entered into the ship, he laid him down to 
sleep, sik) to take his rest : that is, his conscience was 
tos«ed between the commandment of God, wluch sent him 



Tlie rnrnfil 

tioD of 
tiisn'B iiA- 
ture «*ith- 
out God's 

Spirit, 



loii^ AH he 
WRS m kiii 
cartifil imA- 

glnation, 
ccitild ii*it 
abide the 
voice of 
Qod| hut 
fled ; how- 
heh God 
culled him 
A^aiu. 



JoaAKft 
flesh rebel- 
led AgAinft 
th« spirit. 




m 



PROLOGUE TO THE 



[TyP« PALIS. 



The wkked 
Bpek to co- 
ver Ou'k 
vii-keilness 
with rope 
holy works. 



How Jonas 
WHS trnppcd 
ntid made 



I 

P 



ilcinas being 
At raid roil* 
feftseth liLp 

SlDi. 



LoU, how 
thry m/iy 
lie u»eJ 
lawfully. 



to Nineveh, and hin fleshly wisdom^ that disjauaded and 
counselled him the contrar}' ; and at the last prevailed 
against the command meat, and carded him another way, 
a.^ a ship caught between two streams ; and as ]K>eta 
feign the mother of Meleager to be between divers affec- 
tjotis, while to avenge her brotlier's death she sought Iti 
slay her own son. \V hereupon for very pain and tedious- 
ness he lay down to sleep, for to put the commandment, 
which so gnawed and fretted his cofiscience, out of miud ; 
as tlie nature of all wicked is when tliey have sinned a 
goodj to seek all means with riot^ revel^ and pastime, to 
drive the remembrance of sin out of tlieir thougliU^ ; or, as 
Adam did^ to cover their nakedness with aprons of Fo|>e 
holy w orks* But God awoke him out of his dream, and 
set his sins before his face* 

For when the lot had caught Jonas, tlien be sure that his 
sins came to remembrance again ; and that his conscience 
raged no less than the waves of the sea. And then he 
thought that he only was a simier, and the heatlien that 
were in die ship none in respect of him ; and thought also, 
as verily as he was fled from God, that as verily God had 
cast him away : for the sight of the rod maketh the na- 
tural child not only to see, and to knowledge his fatilt, 
but also to forget all his father's old mercy and kindness. 
And then he confessed his sin o^ienly, and had yet lever 
l)erish alone, tlian that the other should have perished 
with him for his sake ; and so of very desperation to have 
lived any longer, he had cast him into the sea betimes, 
except they would be last also* 

To speak of lots, how far forth they are lawful is a light 
question. First, to nse them for the breaking of strife ; 
as when partners, their goods as equally divided as they 
can, take every man his part by lot, to avoid all suspicion 
of deceitfulness : and as tlie Apostles, in the first of the 
Acts, w hen they sought another to succeed Judas the traitor, 
and ti^o persons were presented, then, to break strife^ and 
tci satisfy all parties, did cast lots Mflieiher should be ad- 



1 



Tymd^i^k.] 



PROPHET JONAS. 



OS 



mitiedt desiring God to temper them, and to t£ike whom 
be knew most me^tr seeing they wiitt not whether to pre^ 
fer, or haply could not all agree on either, is lawful, and 
in all like esses. But to abuue them unto tlie tempting of 
God, atid to compel him therewith to utter things whereof 
we stand in doubt^ when we have no commandment of liim 
so to do, as these heathen here did, though God turned it 
unto his glory, catuiot be but eviL 

The heathen shipmen, astonished at the sight of the 
miracle, feared God, prayed to him, offered sacrificcj and 
vowed vows. And I doubt not but that some of them, or 
baply all, came diereby unto the true knowleiige, and true 
worshipping of God, and were w on to God in tlieir souls. 
And thus God, which is infinite merciful in all his ways, 
wrought their souKs health out of the niiimiity of Jonas ; 
even of his good will and purpose, and love wherewith he 
loved them before the world was made, and not ofchauce^ 
as it appeared! unto the eyes of tiie ignorant. 

And that Jonas wa^ tliree days and three nights in the 
bdly of his fish, we cannot thereby prove unto the Jews 
and iniidels^ or unto any man, that Christ must therefore 
die, and be buried and rise again. But we use the ea- 
iample and likeness to strengthen the faith of the weak. 
For he that believeth the one, cannot doubt in the other : 
inasmuch as the hand of God was no less mighty in pre- 
serving Jonas alive agauist all natural possibiUty, and in 
delivering him safe out of his fish,ttian in raising up Christ 
again out of his ^pulchre. And we may describe the 
power and virtue of the resurrection diereby, aa Christ 
liinwelf borroweth the similitude die re to, (Matt, xii.) say- 
ing unto the Jew* that came about him^ and desired a 
sign or a wonder from heaven to certify diem that he was 
Cltrist : this evil and wedlock breaking nation (which 
break the wedlock of faith, wherewith they be maxTied unto 
God, and believe in their fake works,) aeek a sign, but 
there shall no sign be given them, save the sign of the 
prophet Jonas. For as Jonas was three days and three 



Miracle 
moveth the 
heathen to 

krvow GdiI 
uvcj to rail 
upon liiiD. 



lay tliretr 

threi'uighta 
ill the 
wb&le'e 
twUy, m 
Chriit 1«y 
three days 
iifid three 
nighlfl m 
the earth. 



How Christ 
shewcth hia 
death and 
rpsiirrec- 
tion, by Jo- 
nas the tVo< 
phet 



61 



PROLOGUE TO THE 



LTyndale. 



CbrUtby 
the mouth 
of his apos- 
tles preach- 
ed repen- 
tance to the 
Jews. 



Where 
there is no 
repentance, 
there God 
poareth out 
his Ten- 
geance. 



Gildas a 
writer of 
the British 
Cbrooicle. 



Wickliffe a 
preacher of 
repentance. 



nights in the belly of the whale, even so shall the Son of 
Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the 
earth. Which was a watch-word (as we say), and a sharp 
threatening unto the Jews ; and as much to say as thus : 
Ye hard-hearted Jews seek a sign ; lo, this shall be your 
sign : As Jonas was raised out of the sepulchre of hb 
fish, and then sent unto the Ninevites to preach that they 
should perish; even so shall I rise again out of my 
sepulchre, and come and preach repentance unto you. 
See, therefore, when ye see tlie sign that ye repent, or else 
ye shall surely perbh, and not escape. For though the 
infirmities which ye now see in my flesh be a let unto your 
fathers, ye shall then be without excuse when ye see so 
great a miracle, and so great power of God shed out upon 
you. And so Christ came again after the resurrection in 
his Spirit, and preached repentance unto them by die 
mouth of his apostles and disciples, and with niiracles of 
the Holy Ghost. And all that repented not perished 
shortly after, and the rest carried away captive into all 
quarters of the world for an ensample, as ye see unto this 
day. 

And in like manner, since the world began, wheresoever 
repentance was offered and not received, there God took 
cruel vengeance immediately : as ye see in the flood of 
Noah, in the overthrowing of Sodom and Gomorrah, and 
all the country about ; and as ye see of Egypt, of the 
Amorites, Canaanites, and afterward of the very Israelites ; 
and then, at the -last, of the Jews too, and of the Assyrians 
and Babylonians ; and so throughout all the empires of the 
world. 

Gildas preached repentance unto the old Britains that 
inhabited England : they repented not, and therefore God 
sent in their enemies upon them on every side, and de- 
stroyed them up, and gave the land unto other nations. 
And great vengeance hath been taken in that land for 
sin since that time. 

Wickliffe preached repentance unto our fathers not 



TrNDALB ] 



PROPHET JONAS. 



C^ 



bug $41 nee : tliey repetited not, fur their Lea its were in- 
dumie, ;ukI iheir eyes blinded with their own pope-holy 
i-jghtfoiisiif^as, whercviiUi they had muile iheir aouls gay 
agajiist ttie receiving again of the wicked j^pirit, that 
lirtni^elh seven wofiie timn himself with him ; and maketU 
the latter end wor^e than the beginning : for in open sins 
there is lR»{ie of repentance ; but hi huly hypocriay none 
at all. But what followed ? They elew their true and 
right king; J and set up three wrong kings a row, under 
which all the noble blood was i^lain up and half the com- 
mons tliereto ; vi liat in France^ and what with their own 
ffwordi in fighting among tliemselves for the crown ; and. 
the cities and to\Kris decayed^ and the land brought half 
inio a wilderness^ iti respect of that it was before » 

Atid now Christy to preach repentance, is risen yet once 

wn out of hb sepulchre in which the Pope had burietl 
him, and kept htm down with Win pillars and poleaxes^ and 
ajl disgui»ings of hypocrisy, with guile, wiles and falsehood, 
and with the sword of ail princes^ which he had blinded 
with his false merchandise. And as I doubt not of the 
ensamples that are paiil, so am I sure tliat great v^ratli will 
ft^ow, except repentance turn it back again and cease it. 

When Jonas had been in tlie tish's belly a space, and the 
rage of his conscience was somewhat quieted and suaged, 
and he came to himself again and had received a little 
bope^ the qualms and pangs of desperation wluch went 
wer his heart, half overcome, he prayed, as he maketh 
mention in the text, saying, Jonas prayed mito tlie Lord 
his God out of tlie belly of the fish* But the words of 
tiiat prayer are not here set* The prayer that here standeth 
in the text is the prayer of praise and thanksgivings which 
be praje*! and wrote when he was escaped, and past all 
jeopardy. 

In the end of which prayer he saith, ^* I will sacrifice 
Willi tlie voice of thanksgivings and pay that X have vowed, 
that saving cometh of the Lord/' For verily, to confess 
out of tlie heart that all benefits corae of God, even out of 

VUL, IT* F 



They slew 
Uithanl Uie 
Second* 
They vet up 
HeiiTy tlie 
P«vurtb. 
lUnrj thi* 
Fiftk 
Hciiry tUe 
Sjitb, 

Christ tiow 
prt^aclietli 
repentance 
iintn lis. 



Jontis call- 
ed upon 
God out of 
the aflU'» 
belly. 



Tlie aacri- 
lice that 
Jonaa 
offereth 
uoto Qod, 



m 



PROLOGUE TO THE 



[Ttnpalb* 



cei of the 

were or- 
dained to 
putusiti re- 
metdbrance 
o( Ihe SA' 
mfiee of 

JtmtiA did 
tljAt God 
totnnmitd- 
»d bim. 



P 



Kiner^b 

WAn the 
f^reatcRC 
city ]» the 
WQrld. 




the goodness of hk itierc^^ and not deserving of our deed», 
is the only sacrifice that pleaseth God. And to believe 
that all the Jews vowed in their circunicisiou^ jis we in our 
baptism, which vow Jonas, now being taught with ex- 
perience, promiseth to pay« For those outiv^ard sacrifices 
of beasts, unto which Jonas had haply ascritied too much 
before^ were but feeble and childish tlnnga^ aud not or- 
dained ^ that tlie works of themselves should be a service 
unto the people, but to put them in remembrance of this 
inward sacrifice of thanks and of faith, to trust and believe 
in God the only Saviour ; which signification, when it wwi 
avray^ they were abominable and devilish idolatry-, and 
image service ; as our ceremonies and sacraments are be- 
come now to all tliat trust and believe in the work of theui^ 
and are not taught the significations, to edify their souls 
with knowledge and the doctrine of God* 

When Jonas was cast upon land again, then liis will was 
free, and had power to go whither Gpd sent him, and to 
do what God hade, hiB own imaginations laid apart : fijr he 
had been at a new school, yea, and in a furnace where im 
was purged of much refuse aud dross of fleshly wisdom, 
which resisted the wisdom of God, and led Jonas's will 
contrary unto tJie will of God. For as far as we be blind 
in Adam, we cannot but seek and will our own profit, 
pleasure, and glory, — aud as far as we be taught in the 
Spirit, we cannot but seek and will tlie pleasure and glory* 
of God only. 

Aud as the three days journey of Nineveh, whether it 
were in length, or to go roimd about it, or through all the 
streets, I commit unto the discretion of other men. Bui 
I think thai it was then the greatest city of the world. 

Aud that Jonas went a day's journey in the city ♦ — I sup- 
pose he did it not in one day ; but went fair and easily^ 
preaching here a sermon, and there another ; and rebuked 
the sin of the people, for which they must perish. 

And when tliou art come unto the repentance of the 
Ninevites, tliere hast tliou sure earnest, that howsoever 





angrj God be, yet he remeraberetb mercy unto all ihat truly 
fepent and believe iti mercy : wlitcb eii sample our Saviour 
Christ also casteth in the teeth of the indurate Jews^ sayings 
*'The Niueviteii shall rise in judgmeiii with tJiis nation^ 
and condemn them ; for tliey repented at the preaching of 
JonaH^and behuld a greater than Jonaa [is] here :" me af ling of 
himi^elf, at whose preaching yet, though it were never so 
mighty to pierce the heart, and for all his miracles thereto, 
the hard-hearted Jews could not repent ; when the heatlien 
Nioevites repented at the bare preaching of Jonas, rebu- 
king their sins iivithout any miracle at alL — Why l For the 
Jews had leavened the spiritual law of God, and with their 
glosses had made it altogether earthly and fleshly, and so 
had iet a veil or covering on Moseses face^ to shadow and 
darken die glorious brightness of his countenance. It was 
sin to steal, but to rob widow's houses under a colour of long 
pmying, and lo poll, in the name of offerings, and to snare 
the peopie widi intolerable constitutions against all love ; 
to catch their money out of their purses — was no sin at alL 

To smite father and mother was sin ; but to withdraw 
help from lliem at their need, for blind zeal of offering, 
unto the profit of tlie holy Pharisees — was then as merito- 
fious as it is now : to let all thy kin choose whether they 
will sink or swim, while thou bnildest and makest goodly 
foundations for holy people, which thou hast chosen to be 
ihy Christ ; for to supple thy soul widi the oil of their 
iweet blessings, and to be thy Jesus for to save thy soul 
finom the purgatory^ of the blood that only purgeth sin, widi 
tbeirwaicliing, fastings wool ward going, and rmng at raid- 
night, &C-, wherewith yet they purge not themselves from 
their covetousness, pride, lechery, or any vice that thou 
seest among the lay people. 

It was great sin for Christ to heal the people on the 
sabbath day^ unto the glory of God his father, — but none 
it all for them to help their cattle unto their own profit* 

It was sin to eat with unwashed hands, or on an un- 
washed table, or out of an unwashed dish ; — but to eat out 

V 2 



Tlje doc- 
trine of the 
Pbariseei- 
MvH thePji 
pUts make 
aia of thai 



Tl^l3 h the 
dfictrinc of 
LliL- Papists 
and hypo- 
critical 
monki at 
this day. 



The blind 
and fniit- 

of tllC Pll- 



PapkticftI 



m 



PROLOGUE TO THE 



[TySfDALE. 



papists 

Uught 

and their 
worki with 
All enielty. 



The fjilse 
atid wicked 
doctrine of 
the Papist*, 



Eli ad and 
hypcpcriti- 
eal doc- 
trine. 



r 




of that purjiiecl dish, that wliich came of bribery, Uieft^ and 
extortion^ was no %m at alL 

It was exceeding iiieritorious to make many disciples, — 
but to teach them to fear God in his ordiuance^, had they 
no care at all* 

The high prelates so defended the right of holy churchy 
and so feared the people witii the curse of God, aiid ter- 
rible pains of hell, that no man durst leave the vilest herb 
in his garden untithed. And the offerings* and things de- 
dicate unto God, for the profit of his holy vicars, were in 
such estimation and reverence, that it lA'as a much greater 
sin to swear truly by tlieoi, tlian to forswear thyself by God, 
What vengeance then of Gi>d, and how terrible and cruel 
damnation think ye preached they to fall on them that had 
stolen so tlie hol}^ things ? And yet, saith Christy that 
righteousnesf» and faitli in keeping promise, mercy, and in- 
different judgment, were utterly trodden under foot, and 
clean despised of those blessed tathers, which so mightily 
maintained Aaron's patrimony, and had made k so prosper^ 
ous, and environed it, and walled it about on everj' side 
with the fear of God, that no man durst touch it 

It was great holuiess to ganiish the sepulchres of the pro- 
phets, and to condenni their own fathers for slaying of 
them^ and yet were they themselves for blind zeal of their 
own constitutions, as ready as their fathers to slay whosoever 
testified unto Uieni the same trudi wliich the prophets tes- 
tified unto their fathers. So that Christ compareth all tlie 
righteousness of those holy patriarchs unto the outward 
beauty of a painted sepulchre^ fill! of stench and all un- 
cleanness within. 

And fnially, to beguile a man's neighbour, in subtle bar- 
gaining, and to wTap and compass him in with cautels of 
the law, was then, as it is now in the kingdom of the Pope. 
By the reason whereof, tliey excluded the law of love out 
their hearts; and consequently, all true repentance: for 
how could diey repent of that they could not see to 
be sin? 




Ttn*dalb.] 



PROPHET JONAS- 



m 



And on the other side they had aet up a righteousness^ of 
Itoly vvurlus, to cleanse their souls widial; as the Pope 
waiivtifieth us with holy oil, holy bread, holy suit, holy caii- 
dlesj holy dumb ceremwiiies^ and holy dumb blessings^ and 
with whatsoever holiness thou wilt, s^ave with tlie holiness 
of God's word, which only »peaketh unto tlie heart, and 
iheweth t]ie soul \m tilUiiness, aud unclea tineas of sin, and 
leadeth her by the way of repentance unto the fouiiLaiti of 
Christ's blood, to wash it away through faith. By the 
reason of which false righteousnei^s they were disobedient 
unto the righteousness of Goti, which is the forgivenesks; of 
sin in Christ's blood, and could not believe it: and so 
til rough fleshly interpreting the law, and false imagined 
righteousnesi, their hearts \t ere hardened, and made as slony 
as clay in an hot furnace of tire^ that they could receive 
neither r^pentance^ nor faith, or any moisture of grace at all. 

But the heathen Ninevites, though they were blinded 
with lusts, yet were in those two points uncorrnpt, and un- 
hardened, and therefore, with the only preaching of Jonas^ 
came unto the knowledge of their sins, and confessed them, 
and repented truly, and turned every man from his evil 
tleeds, and declared their si^orrow of heart, and true repent- 
ance, with their deeds which tliey did out of faith and hope 
of forgiveness, chastising tlieir bodies wJtli prayer and fast- 
ing, and with taking all pleasures from the He^h : trusting, 
as God was angry for their wickedness, even so should he 
foigive them of his mercy, if they repented, and forsocjk 
their uiisliving. 

And in the last end of all, tliou hast yet a goodly ens am- 
ple of learning, to see how eardiy Jonas is still, for all his 
t trying in tlie whale's belly. He waa so sore displeased be- 
cause the Nineviles perished not, that he was weary of his 
life, and wished after death, for very sorrow tliat he had 
lost the glory of his prophecying, in that his prophecy 
came not to pass. But God rebuked him with a likeness, 
saving, it grieveth thine heart for tlie loss of a vile shrub, 
or spray, whereon thou bestowedst no labour or cost, net- 



Tlic Phiin- 
sceij set u|> 
a riglite- 
ouft^ps^ of 
work]» U> 
clennsc 
their souU 
wilbaL 



By \he 

wo rid U* 11 lid 
f!frshly in- 
tcrpretatl" 
ODs of the 
^criptiin^n 
the Jews' 
heHrts were 
liardt:iii:d. 



The hea- 

tlien re- 
peated nt 

the prrnch- 
inf of Jo- 



A gnoil and 

prufiUMe 

exMii]{>re. 



fo 



PllOLOGUE TO IHE 



tTWKOJILK, 



Nate here 
tlie grent 
itiercj erf 



ther was it thine hajidy work; how much more then 
ahoy Id it grieve mine heart the loss of so great ii multi- 
tude of iiniocent^ as are lii Niiieveh, which are all mine 
hands' work ? Nay, Jonas, I am God over all, and faUier 
jie well unto the heathen ms unto the Jews; aiMl mereiful 
to all, and warn ere I ^mite, neitlier threat I so cruelly 
by any prophet, but that I will forgive, if tliey repent and 
a«k mercy: neither on the other side, wliatsoever I pro- 
mise will I fulfil it, save for their sakes only which trust in 
me, aud submit tliemaelves to keep my laws of very love^ as 
natural children. 



Till? niiht 

how to read 
the Scrip- 
litre. 



Atl onr 

dei'ds nre 

fi'ct in 
Christ's 
blood. 



On this manner to read the Scripture is tlie right use 
thereof^ aud why the Holy Ghost caused it to be written* 
That is, that thou lirst seek out the law that God will have 
thee to do, interpreting it spiritually, without gloss or cover- 
ing the brightness of Moses's face; so that thou feel in thine 
heart, how that it U damnable sin before God, not to love 
thy neighbour that is thine enemy as purely as Christ loved 
thee; and that not to love thy neighbour in thine heart, ia 
to have committed already all sin against him. 

And therefore until tliat love be come^ thou must know- 
kdge unfeignedly that there is sin in the beat deed thou 
doest: and it mu»t earnestly grieve thine heart, and thoH 
must wash all thy good deeds in Christ's bloody ere they 
can be pure, and an acceptable sacrifice unto God; aud 
must desire God tlie Father, for his sake to take thy deecb 
a worth, and to pardon the imperfectness of theni,<and to 
give thee power to do them better, and witli more fervent 
love. 

And on the other side, thou must search diligently for 
the promises of mercy, which God hath promised thee 
again. Which two points, that is to wit, the law spiritually 
interpreted, how that all is damnable sin that is not un- 
feigned love out of the ground and bottom of the heart, 
after the ensample of Christ's love to us, because we be 
all equally created and formed of one God our Father, and 




TVKDAI^K.] 



PROPHET JONAS. 



71 



iaditfereiitJ) bought, and redeemed with one blood of our 
Saviour Jesus ChtiM: andtbatthe promises be given unto 
a repenting soulj that thirsteth and longeth after them of 
iiie pure and fatherly niercj of God, tlnough our faitli 
only, without aLt deser\ing of our deeds, or merits of our 
woHcA, but for Christ's sake alone, and for the merits and 
deservings of his works, death and passions that he suilered 
alJ together for us, and not for himself: which two points 
1 say, if they be written in thine heart, are the keys which 
:so o|>en all the Scripture unto Uiee, that no creature can 
lock tliee out, and with whicli thou shah go in and out, 
and find pasture, and food every where. And if these 
kis^ous be not written in diine heart, tlien is all the Scrip- 
ture shut up, as a kernel in the siiell, so that thou mayest 
read it, and comment of it, and rehearse all the studies of 
itj and dispute wittily, and be a prtjfoimd sophi»ter, 
and yet under stand not one jot thereof. 

And thirdly, that thou take the stories and lives %vhich 
are contained in the Bible, for sure and undoubted en- 
samples, that God so will deal with us unto the world's end* 
Herewith reader, farewell, and be commended unto 
God, and unto the grace of his Spirit. And first see that 
thou stop not thine ears unto the calling of God, and 
harden not thine heart beguiled with fleshly interpreting of 
the law, and false imagined and hypocritish righteousness, 
lest then the Ninevites rise with thee at the day of judg- 
ment^ and condemn thee* 

And secondarily, if thou find ought amiss, when thou 
sees! thyself in the glass of God's word, think it neces- 
sary wisdom to amend the same betimes, monbhed and 
warned by the en sample of other men, rather tdanto tarry 
until thou be beaten also. 

And thirdly, if it shall so chance, that the wild lusts of 
thy flesh shall blind thee^ and carry thee clean away with 
them for a time t yet at the latter end, when the God of 
all mercy shall have compassed ihee in on every side with 
temptations, tribulation, adversities and cumbrance, to 



AU the pro* 
mli«t made 
b^ God in 
Clirift^ are 
m&dc to 
them that 
repeat 



The two 
keya tint 
ape Q all the 
Script lire* 



A rerf 
rruitful atirl 
good ks^ 

fiOQ' 



n 



PROLOGUE TO THE 



[TfHGALBp 



Jliiw Lhim 
inaye:ititLali1 
times n PI fly 
ilie storks 
of tUc ili- 
hte to tliy 
grcal com- 
fort 



Tlie lnw 

futfilleil 

wHti ttic 
mi^^rcy tliitt 
in )u Christ. 



liitliy 

he^art ore 
the wurdi 
of the law, 
aucl in ihhic 
heart are 
the pro- 
miies and 
mercy of 
Christ. 

OursinUof 

oufsel ven ; 
but rerois- 
ftlnct ntfVl 
forgivent^si 
thereof 
Cometh 
freely of 
the luercy 
of God for 
Christ's 



hung thee home again unto thine own hearti and to »et 
tliy ttins which thou would est so feign cover, and put out 
of mind with d electa I ion of voluptuotis pastimes, before tlie 
eyes of th) conscience; then call the faithful ensamp^ 
of Jonas, and all like stories unto ihy remembrance, ajid 
with Jona» tuni unto thy I'uther that smote thee, not to 
ca^^t thee away^ but to lay a corrosive, and a fretting plas- 
ter unto the pock, tJiat lay bid atid fret inward, to drmw 
the disease out, and to make it appear, that thou mightest 
ihe\ thy i^ickness, and the danger thereof, and come and 
recei?e the healing plaster of mercy. 

And forget not that whatsoever ensample of mercy God 
halh sliewed since the beginning of the world, the «ame is 
promined thee^ if tliou wilt in like manner tnm again, and 
receive it as they did, and with Jonas be aknowen of thy 
din and confess it, and knowledge it unto thy father. 

And as the law which fretteth thy conscience is in thine 
heart, and is none outward thing, even so seek witliin thy 
heart the plaster of mercy, the promises of forgiveness in 
onr Saviour Jesus Christ, according unto all the ensam- 
pies of mercy that are gone before* 

And with Jonas let them that wait on vanities, and seek 
God here and there^ and in every temple save in their 
hearts, go: and seek thou the Testament of God in 
thine heart. For in thine heart is the word of the law, 
and in thine heart is the word of faith, in the proniises of 
mercy in Jesus Christ. So that if thou confess witlj a 
repenting heart and knowledge, and surely believe that 
Jesus is Lord over all sin, thou art safe. 

And finally, when the rage of thy conscience is ceased, 
and quieted with fast faith in the promises of mercy, then 
offer with Jonas the oflering of praise and thanksgiving^ 
and pay the vow of thy baptism; tliat God only saveth 
of his only mercy and gonduess: that is, believe sttnl- 
Aistly, and preach constantly, that it is Hod only that 
smiteth, and God only that bealeth: ascribing the cause of 
thy tribulation unto thine own sin, and the cause of thy 
deliverance unto the mercy of God* 



Ttnoalb.] 



PROPHET JONAS. 



73 



And beware of the leaven that saith we have power in 
our free-will before the preaching of the gospel, to deserve 
grace, to keep the law of congruity, or God to be unrigh- 
teous. And say with John in the first, that as the law was 
given by Moses,- even so grace to fulfil it is given by 
Christ. And when they say our deeds with grace deserve 
heaven, say tliou with Paul, (Rom. vi.) "that ever- 
lasting life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our 
Lord, and that we be made sons by faith.'' (John i.) 
"And therefore heirs of God with Christ." (Rom. viii.) 
And say, that we receive all of God through faith, that 
followeth repentance, and that we do not our works unto 
God, but either unto ourselves, to slay the sin that re- 
maineth in the flesh, and to wax perfect; either unto our 
neighbours, which do as much for us again in other things. 
And when a man exceedeth in gifts of grace, let him 
understand that they be given him, as well for his weak 
brethren, as for himself: as though all the bread be com- 
mitted unto the panter, yet for his fellows with him, which 
give the thanks unto their lord, and recompense the 
panter again, with other kind of service in their pffices. 
And when they say that Christ hath made no satisfac- 
tion for the sin we do after our baptism: say thou with the 
doctrine of Paul, that in our baptism we receive the me- 
rits of Christ's death through repentance and faith, of 
which two, baptism is the sign. And though when we 
sin of fraility after our baptism, we receive the sign no 
more, yet we be renewed again through repentance, and 
faith in Christ's blood, of which twain, that sign of bap- 
tism even continued among us in baptizing our young 
children, doth ever keep us in mind, and call us back 
again unto our profession if we be gone astray, and pro- 
miseth us forgiveness. Neither can actual sin be washed 
away with our works, but with Christ's blood: neither 
can there be any other sacrifice, or satisfaction to God- 
ward for them, save Christ's blood. Forasmuch as we 
can do no works unto God, but receive only of his mercy 



God bath 
no need of 
onr worki 
but we 
most do 
them for 
onnelres : 
and for the 
profit of 
onr neigh- 
bours. 

Christ hath 
satisfied for 
our sins, as 
well after 
baptbui, as 
before bap- 
tism. 



Our actual 
sins arc 
washed 
away in 
Christ's 
blood. 



74 PROLOGUE TO JONAS. [Tyndale. 

with our repenting faith, through Jesus Christ our Lord 
and only Saviour: unto whom and unto God our Father 
through him, and unto his holy Spirit, that only purgeth, 
sanctifieth, and washeth us in the innocent blood of our 
redemption^ be praise for ever. Amen. 



THE PARABLE 

of the

WICKED MAMMON. 



That faith, the mother of all good works, justifieth us, before we can bring 
forth any good work: as the husband marrieth his wife before he can have 
any lawful children by her. Furthermore, as the husband marrieth not 
his wife that she should continue unfaithful as before, and as she was in 
the state of virginity, (wherein it was impossible for her to bear fruit) but 
contrariwise to make her fruitful; even so faith justifieth us not, that is to 
say, marrieth us not to God, that we should continue unfruitful as before, 
but that he should put the seed of his Holy Spirit in us, (as St John in his 
first Epistle calleth it) and to make us fruitful. For, saith Paul, (Eph. ii.) 
"By grace are ye made safe through faith, and that not of yourselves: for 
it is the gift of God, and cometh not of the works, lest any man should 
boast himself. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto 
good works, which God hath ordained that we should walk in them." Amen. 



WILLIAM TYNDALE, 

OTHERWISE CALLED HITCHINS, 

TO THE READER. 



GRACE and peace, with all manner [of] spiri- 
tual feeling and living, worthy of the kind- 
ness of Christ, be with the reader, and with 
all that trust the will of God. Amen. 

The cause why I set my name before this
little Treatise, and have not rather done it in
the New Testament, is, that then I followed
the counsel of Christ, which exhorteth men
(Matt. vi.) to do their good deeds secretly, and
to be content with the conscience of well-doing; 
and that God seeth us; and patiently to abide 
the reward of the last day, which Christ hath 
purchased for us: and now would I fain have 
done likewise, but am I compelled otherwise 
to do. 

While I abode, a faithful companion, which 
now hath taken another voyage upon him, to 
preach Christ where, I suppose, he was never 
yet preached, (God, which put in his heart thither 
to go, send his Spirit with him, comfort him, 
and bring his purpose to good effect,) one 
William Roye, a man somewhat crafty, when he
cometh unto new acquaintance, and before he
be thorough known, and namely, when all is 




78 



PREFACE TO 



[Tyndale. 



spent, came unto me and offered his help. As 
long as he had no money somewhat I could 
rule him; but as soon as he had gotten him 
money, he became like himself again. Never- 
theless, I suffered all things till that was ended, 
which I could not do alone without one, both to 
write, and to help me to compare the texts 
together. When that was ended, I took my 
leave, and bade him farewell for our two lives; 
and, as men say, a day longer. After we were 
departed, he went and gat him new friends, 
which thing to do he passeth all that ever I yet 
knew. And there, when he had stored him of 
money, he gat him to Argentine, where he pro- 
fesseth wonderful faculties, and maketh boast of 
no small things. A year after that, and now 
twelve months before the printing of this work, 
came one Jerome, a brother of Greenwich also, 
through Worms to Argentine, saying that he in- 
tended to be Christ's disciple another while, and 
to keep (as nigh as God would give him grace,) 
the profession of his baptism, and to get his 
living with his hands, and to live no longer idly, 
and of the sweat and labour of those captives, 
which they had taught not to believe in Christ, 
but in cut shoes, and russet coats. Which 
Jerome, with all diligence, I warned of Roye's 
boldness, and exhorted him to beware of him, 
and to walk quietly, and with all patience and 
long-suffering, according as we have Christ and 
his apostles for an ensample, which thing he also 
promised me. 



Tyndale.] 



THE READER, 



79 



Nevertheless, when he was come to Ar- 
gentine, William Roye (whose tongue is able 
not only to make fools stark mad, but also to 
deceive the wisest, that is at the first sight and 
acquaintance,) gat him to him, and set him a 
work to make rhymes, while he himself translated 
a dialogue out of Latin into English, in whose 
Prologue he promiseth more a great deal than I 
fear me he will ever pay. Paul saith, (2 Tim. ii.)
"The servant of the Lord must not strive, but 
be peaceable unto all men, and ready to teach, 
and one that can suffer the evil with meekness, and 
that can inform them that resist; if God at any 
time will give them repentance for to know the 
truth." It becometh not then the Lord's servant 
to use railing rhymes, but God's word, which is 
the right weapon to slay sin, vice and all iniquity. 
The Scripture of God is good to teach and to 
improve. (2 Tim. iii. and 2 Thess. ii.) Paul 
speaking of Antichrist, saith, "Whom the Lord 
shall destroy with the Spirit, or breath of his 
mouth;" that is, with the word of God, And 
(2 Cor. x.) "The weapons of our war are not
carnal things, (saith he) but mighty in God to 
cast down strong holds" and so forth; that is, 
to destroy high buildings of false doctrine. The 
word of God is that day whereof Paul speaketh, 
(1 Cor. iii.) which shall declare all things, and
that fire which shall try every man's work, and 
consume false doctrine; with that sword ought 
men sharply to fight, and not to rail with foolish 
rhymes. Let it not offend thee that some walk 



3 Tim. u1. 
2 Tlicaa. iL 






PREFACE TO 



[Tyndale. 



Act*Ti. 



Antkliristf 
whftt il iti 






inordinately; let not the wickedness of Judas 
cause thee to despise the doctrine of his fellows. 
No man ought to think that Stephen was a false 
preacher because that Nicholas, which was 
chosen fellow with him (Acts vi.) to minister 
unto the widows, fell after into great heresies, as 
histories make mention. Good and evil go 
always together, one cannot be known without 
the other. 

Mark this also above all things, — that Anti- 
christ is not an outward thing, that is to say, a 
man that should suddenly appear with wonders, 
as our fathers talked of him. No, verily; for 
Antichrist is a spiritual thing. And is as much 
to say as against Christ; that is, one that 
preacheth false doctrine, contrary to Christ. 
Antichrist was in the Old Testament, and fought 
with the prophets; he was also in the time of 
Christ and the apostles, as thou readest in the 
Epistles of John, and of Paul to the Corinthians 
and Galatians, and other Epistles, Antichrist is 
now, and shall, (I doubt not) endure till the 
world's end. But his nature is (when he is 
uttered and overcome with the word of God) to 
go out of the play for a season, and to disguise 
himself, and then to come in again with a new 
name and new raiment As thou seest how 
Christ rebuketh the Scribes and the Pharisees 
in the gospel, (which were very Antichrists,) say- 
ing, "Woe be to you, Pharisees, for ye rob 
widows' houses; ye pray long prayers under a 
colour; ye shut up the kingdom of heaven, and 




TYNDALE.] 



THE READER. 



91 



suffer them not that would to enter in; ye have 
taken away the key of knowledge; ye make men 
break God's commandments with your traditions; 
ye beguile the people with hypocrisy and such 
like; Which things all our prelates do, but have 
yet gotten them new names, and other garments, 
and are otherwise disguised. There is difference 
in the names between a pope, a cardinal, a bishop, 
and so forth, and to say a scribe, a pharisee, 
a senior, and so forth; but the thing is all one. 
Even so now, when we have uttered him, he will 
change himself once more, and turn himself 
into angel of light. (2 Cor. xi.) Read the place, 
I exhort thee, whatsoever thou art that readest 
this, and note it well. The Jews look for Christ, 
and he is come fifteen hundred years ago, and 
they not aware: we also have looked for Anti- 
christ, and he hath reigned as long, and we not 
aware; and that because either of us looked 
carnally for him, and not in the places where we 
ought to have sought. The Jews had found 
Christ verily if they had sought him in the law 
and the prophets, whither Christ sendeth them 
to seek. (John v.) We also had spied out Anti- 
christ long ago if we had looked in the doctrine 
of Christ and his apostles, where, because the 
beast seeth himself now to be sought for, he 
roareth, and seeketh new holes to hide himself 
in, and changeth himself into a thousand fashions, 
with all manner [of] wiliness, falsehood, subtilty, 
and craft. Because that his excommunications are 
come to light, he maketh it treason unto the 

VOL. II. G 



2 Car, U. 



hntb been 
amonf^ us n 
Idag time. 



John ^. 



Antkbritt 

it trciisoii 
to be lie- 
qilaintcd 
witbChri^t. 






PREFACE TO 



[Tyndale. 



king to be acquainted with Christ. If Christ and 
they may not reign together, one hope we have 
that Christ shall live ever. The old Antichrists 
brought Christ unto Pilate, saying, By our law 
he ought to die; and when Pilate bade them 
judge him after their law, they answered. It is 
not lawful for us to kill any man; which they did 
to the intent that they which regarded not the 
shame of their false excommunications, should 
yet fear to confess Christ, because that the tem- 
poral sword had condemned him. They do all 
things of a good zeal, they say; they love you 
so well, that they had rather burn you, than that 
you should have fellowship with Christ. They 
are jealous over you amiss, (as saith St. Paul 
Gal. iv.) They would divide you from Christ and 
his holy Testament, and join you to the Pope, 
to believe in his testament and promises. Some 
man will ask, peradventure, Why I take the 
labour to make this work, inasmuch as they will 
burn it, seeing they burnt the gospel? I answer, 
In burning the New Testament they did none 
other thing than that I looked for, no more shall 
they do if they burn me also, if it be God's will 
it shall so be. 

Nevertheless, in translating the New Testament 
I did my duty, and so do I now, and will do as 
much more as God hath ordained me to do. And 
as I offered that to all men to correct it, who- 
soever could, even so I do this. Whosoever, 
therefore, readeth this, compare it unto the 
Scripture. If God's word bear record unto it, 









Tyndale.] THE WICKED MAMMON. 83 

and thou also feelest in thine heart that it is so, 
be of good comfort, and give God thanks. If 
God's word condemn it, then hold it accursed, 
and so do all other doctrines: as Paul coun- 
selleth his Galatians:— Believe not every spirit 
suddenly, but judge them by the word of God, 
which is the trial of all doctrine, and lasteth for 
ever. Amen. 



THE PARABLE 



OF THE 



WICKED MAMMON. 



"There was a certain rich man which had a steward, that was accused
unto him that he had wasted his goods; and called him, and said unto him. How 
is it that I hear this of thee? Give account of thy stewardship; for thou 
mayest be no longer my steward. The steward said within himself, What shall 
I do, for my master will take away from me my stewardship? I cannot dig, and 
to beg I am ashamed. I wot what to do, that when I am put out of my steward- 
ship, they may receive me into their houses. Then called he all his master's 
debtors, and said unto the first. How much owest thou unto my master? And 
he said. An hundred tons of oil. And he said to him. Take thy bill, and sit 
down quickly, and write fifty. Then said he to another, What owest thou? 
Aad he said, An hundred quarters of wheat. He said to him. Take thy bill, and 
write fourscore. And the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had 
done wisely. For the children of this world are in their kind wiser than the 
children of light. And I say also unto you, make you friends of the wicked 
mammon, that when ye shall have need, they may receive you into everlasting 
habitations." (Luke xvith chapter.) 

FORASMUCH as with this, and divers such other 
texts, many have enforced to draw the people from the 
true faith, and from putting their trust in the truth of 
God's promises, and in the merits and deserving of his 
Christ our Lord; and have also brought it to pass, (for 

G 2 



84 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Matt. xzir. 
2 Tim. iU. 



I Cor. i. 
aud ii. 

Rom. X. 



many false prophets shall arise and deceive many, and 
much wickedness must also be, saith Christ; (Matt. xxiv.) 
and Paul saith, (2 Tim. iii.) Evil men and deceivers 
shall prevail in evil, while they deceive, and are deceived 
themselves;) and have taught them to put their trust in 
their own merits; and brought them in belief that they 
shall be justified in the sight of God by the goodness of 
their own works, and have corrupted the pure word of 
God, to confirm their Aristotle withal. For though that 
the philosophers, and worldly wise men, were enemies 
above all enemies to the gospel of God; and though the 
worldly wisdom cannot comprehend the wisdom of Grod, 
as thou mayest see 1 Cor. i. and ii. And though worldly 
righteousness cannot be obedient unto the righteousness of 
God, (Rom. x.) yet whatsoever they read in Aristotle, 
that must be first true. And to maintain that, they rend 
and tear the Scriptures with their distinctions, and ex- 
pound them violently, contrary to the meaning of the text, 
and to the circumstances that go before and after, and to 
a thousand clear and evident texts. Wherefore I have 
taken in hand to expound this gospel, and certain other 
places of the New Testament; and, (as far forth as God 
shall lend me grace,) to bring the Scripture unto the 
right sense, and to dig again the wells of Abraham, and 
to purge and cleanse them of the earth of worldy wisdom 
wherewith these Philistines have stopped them. Which 
grace, grant me, God, for the love that he hath unto 
his Son, Jesus our Lord, unto the glory of his name. 
Amen. 



Faith only 
ju&tifieth. 



Romaos i. 



That faith only before all works and without all merits, 
but Christ's only, justifieth and setteth us at peace with 
God, is proved by Paul in the first chapter to the Romans. 
I am not ashamed (saith he) of the gospel, that is to say, 
of the glad tidings and promises which God hath made, 
and sworn to us in Christ. For it (that is to say the gospel) 
is the power of God unto salvation to all that believe. 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



85 



2 Cor, liU 



And it followeth in the foresaid chapter, the just or righ- 
teous must live by faith, 

For in the faith which we have in Christ, and in God's
promises find we mercy, life, favour and peace. In the
law we find death, damnation, and wrath: moreover, the
curse and vengeance of God upon us. And it (that is to 
say the law) is called of Paul (2 Cor. iii.) the ministration 
of death and damnation. In the law we are proved to be 
the enemies of God, and that we hate him. For how can 
we be at peace with God and love him, seeing we are con- 
ceived and born under the power of the devil, and are his 
possession and kingdom, his captives and bondmen, and 
led at his will, and he holdeth our hearts, so that it is im- 
possible for us to consent to the will of God, much more 
is it impossible for a man to fulfil the law of his own 
strength and power, seeing that we are by birth and of 
nature, the heirs of eternal damnation. As saith Paul, 
Eph. ii. We (saith he) are by nature the children of
wrath, which thing the law doth but utter only, and helpeth 
us not, yea requireth impossible things of us. The law 
when it commandeth that thou shalt not lust, giveth thee 
not power so to do, but damneth thee, because thou canst 
not so do. 



If thou wilt therefore be at peace with God, and love 
him, thou must turn to the promises of God, and to the 
gospel, which is called of Paul in the place before rehearsed
to the Corinthians, the ministration of righteousness, and
of the Spirit. For faith bringeth pardon, and forgiveness
freely purchased by Christ's blood, and bringeth also the
Spirit, the Spirit looseth the bonds of the devil, and setteth 
us at liberty. For where the Spirit of the Lord is, there 
is liberty, saith Paul in the same place to the Corinthians, 
that is to say, there the heart is free, and hath power to love 
the will of God, and there the heart mourneth that he 
cannot love enough. Now is that consent of the heart 
unto the law of God eternal life, yea, though there be no 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



ResiAt the 
devil with 
the sliieUl 
of fftitJi. 



r 



Chith is tUe 
ho)}" tnndk* 

we mnviX 
ble«B our- 
■elvci lit 
tke list 



Eojuans lit 
Rotnaiu iv. 

cottDted to 
vi for righ^ 
teousaes&. 



power yet in the members to fulfil it. Let every man 
therefore (according to Paul's counsel in the vith chapter to 
the Ephesians,) arm himself with the armour of God; 
that is to understand, with God's promises. And above all 
things (saith he) take unto you the shield of faith, where- 
with ye may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the 
wicked, that ye may be able to resist in the evil day of 
temptation, and namely at the hour of death. 

See therefore thou have God's promises in thine heart, 
and that thou believe them without wavering; and when 
temptation ariseth, and the devil layeth the law and thy 
deeds against thee, answer him with the promises, and turn 
to God, and confess thyself to him, and say, it is even so 
or else how could he be merciful? but remember that he 
is the God of mercy and of truth, and cannot but fulfil 
his promises. Also remember, that his son's blood is 
stronger than all the sins and wickedness of the whole 
world, and therewith quiet thyself, and thereunto commit 
thyself and bless thyself in all temptation, (namely at the 
hour of death) with that holy candle. Or else perishest 
thou, though thou hast a thousand holy candles about thee, 
a hundred ton of holy water, a ship full of pardons, a 
cloth-sack full of friar's coats, and all the ceremonies in 
the world, and all the good works, deservings, and merits 
of all the men in the world, be they, or were they, never so 
holy, God's word only lasteth for ever, and that which he 
hath sworn doth abide, when all other things perish. So 
long as thou findest any consent in thine heart unto the law 
of God, that it is righteous and good, and also displeasure 
that thou canst not fulfil it, despair not, neither doubt but 
that God's Spirit is in thee, and that thou art chosen for 
Christ's sake to the inheritance of eternal life. 

And again, (Rom. iii.) We suppose that a man is justified 
through faith, without the deeds of the law, And likewise 
(Rom. iv.) we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for 
righteousness. Also (Rom. v.) seeing that we are justified 
through faith, we are at peace with God, Also (Rom x.) 




Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



with the heart doth a man believe to be made righteous. 
Also (Gal. iii.) received ye the Spirit by the deeds of the 
law, or by hearing of the faith? Doth he which mi- 
nistereth the Spirit unto you, and worketh miracles among 
you, do it of the deeds of the law, or by hearing of faith? 
Even as Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned [to] 
him for righteousness. Understand therefore (saith he) 
that the children of faith are the children of Abraham. 
For the Scripture saw before that God would justify the 
heathen or gentiles by faith, and shewed before glad tidings 
unto Abraham, In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. 
Wherefore they which are of faith are blessed, that is to 
wit, made righteous with righteous Abraham. For as 
many as are of the deeds of the law, are under curse. For 
it is written (saith he) Cursed is every man that continueth 
not in all things which are written in the book of the law, 
to fulfil them. 

Also, (Gal. ii.) where he resisted Peter in the face, he 
saith, We which are Jews by nation, and not sinners of the 
Gentiles, know that a man is not justified by the deeds of 
the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, and have therefore 
believed on Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the 
faith of Christ, and not by the deeds of the law, for by the 
deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified. Item, in the 
same place he saith, Touching that I now live, I live in the 
faith of the son of God, which loved me, and gave himself 
for me; I despise not the grace of God, for if righte- 
ousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain. And 
of such like ensamples are all the Epistles of Paul full 
Mark how Paul laboureth with himself to express the ex- 
ceeding mysteries of faith, in the Epistle to the Ephesians, 
and in the Epistle to the Colossians. Of these and many 
such like texts, are we sure that the forgiveness of sins 
and justifying [are] appropriate unto faith only, without the 
adding to of works. 

Take forth also the similitude that Christ maketh, (Mat. 
vii.) A good tree bringeth forth good fruit, and a bad tree 



Gki. iii. 



The chU- 

dren of 
fa I ill nre 
the fliil- 
drrn of 
AbraliAiti. 



GaL \l 



Faitli only^ 
ju otitic ni 



Mtit^TlL 



88 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Mftt. jlU, 



A principle 
Chri^C. 



Faitli be- 

Willi Ifje 
word of 
God. bring * 
cth forth ^ 
good fniiu 



bringeth forth bad fruit. There seest thou, that the fruit 
maketh not the tree good, but the tree the fruit; and that 
the tree must aforehand be good, or be made good, ere it 
can bring forth good fruit. As he also saith, (Matt. xii.) 
Either make the tree good and his fruit good also, either 
make the tree bad and his fruit bad also. How can ye 
speak well while ye yourselves are evil? So likewise is this 
true, and nothing more true, that a man before all good 
works must first be good, and that it is impossible that 
works should make him good, if he were not good before, 
ere he did good works. For this is Christ's principle and 
(as we say) a general rule. How can ye speak well, 
while ye are evil? so Likewise how can ye do good, while 
ye are evil? 

This is therefore a plain, and a sure conclusion not to 
be doubted of, that there must be first in the heart of a 
man before he do any good works, a greater and a more 
precious thing than all the good works in the world, to recon- 
cile him to God, to bring the love and favour of God to 
him, to make him love God again, to make him righteous 
and good in the sight of God, to do away his sin, to de- 
liver him and loose him out of that captivity wherein he 
was conceived and born, in which he could neither love 
God, neither the will of God. Or else how can he work 
any good work that should please God, if there were not 
some supernatural goodness in him given of God freely, 
whereof that good work must spring? even as a sick man 
must first be healed or made whole, ere he can do the deeds 
of an whole man; and as the blind man must first have sight 
given him ere he can see; and he that hath his feet in 
fetters, gives, or stocks, must first be loosed, ere he can go, 
walk or run, and even as they which thou readest of in 
the gospel, that they were possessed of the devils, could 
not laud God till the devils were cast out. 

That precious thing which must be in the heart, ere a 
man can work any good work, is the word of God, which 
in the gospel preacheth, profereth, and bringeth unto all 







Tyndale.] THE WICKED MAMMON. 81 

that repent and believe, the favour of God in Christ. Who- 
soever heareth the word and believeth it, the same is thereby 
righteous, and thereby is given him the Spirit of God, 
which leadeth him unto all that is the will of God, and is 
loosed from the captivity and bondage of the devil, and 
his heart is free to love God, and hath lust to do the will 
of God. Therefore it is called the word of life, the word 
of grace, the word of health, the word of redemption, 
the word of forgiveness, and the word of peace; he that 
heareth it not, or believeth it not, can by no means be made 
righteous before God. This confirmeth Peter in the xvth
of the Acts, saying that God through faith doth purify the 
hearts. For of what nature soever the word of God is, 
of the same nature must the hearts be which believe 
thereon, and cleave thereunto. Now is the word living, 
pure, righteous and true, and even so maketh it the hearts 
of them that believe thereon. 

If it be said that Paul (when he saith in the iiird to the 
Romans, No flesh shall be, or can be justified by the 
deeds of the law) meaneth it of the ceremonies or sacri- 
fices, it is a lie, verily. For it followeth immediately, — 
by the law cometh the knowledge of sin. Now are 
they not the ceremonies that utter sin, but the law of com- 
mandments. In the ivth he saith The law causeth wrath, 
which cannot be understood of the ceremonies, for they 
were given to reconcile the people to God again after they 
had sinned. If, as they say, the ceremonies which were 
given to purge sin and to reconcile, justify not, neither
bless but temporally, much more the law of command-
ments justifieth not. For that which proveth a man sick, 
healeth him not, neither doth the cause of wrath bring to 
favour, neither can that which damneth save a man. When 
the mother commandeth her child but even to rock the 
cradle, it grudgeth, the commandment doth but utter the 
poison that lay hid, and setteth him at bate [contention] 
with his mother, and maketh him believe she loveth him not. 






THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Gitl ill 



Fnith in 

prnnoiRes 
dothjuHtIfy 



Cbrbt is 
the ttorc:- 
bouic of 
mercy Tor 



These commandments also, Thou shalt not covet thy 
neighbour's house, thou shall not lust, desire, or wish after 
thy neighbour's wife, servant, maid, ox, or ass, or whatsoever 
pertaineth unto thy neighbour, give me not power so to do, 
but utter the poison that is in me and damn me because I 
cannot so do, and prove that God is wrath with me, seeing 
that his will and mine are so contrary. Therefore saith 
Paul (Gal. iii.) If there had been given such a law that 
could have given life, then no doubt righteousness had 
come by the law, but the Scripture concludeth all under sin 
(saith he) that the promise might be given unto them that 
believe through the faith that is in Jesus Christ.. 

The promises, when they are believed, are they that jus- 
tify, for they bring the Spirit which looseth the heart, 
giveth lust to the law, and certifieth us unto the good-will 
of God unto usward. if we submit ourselves unto God 
and desire him to heal us, he will do it, and will in the 
mean time (because of the consent of the heart unto the 
law) count us for full whole, and will no more hate us, but 
pity us, cherish us, be tender hearted to us, and love us as 
he doth Christ himself. Christ is our Redeemer, Saviour, 
peace, atonement and satisfaction, and hath made amends 
or satisfaction to Godward for all the sin which they that 
repent (consenting to die law and believing the promises) 
do, have done, or shall do. So that if through fragility 
we fall a thousand times in a day, yet if we do repent 
again, we have alway mercy laid up for us in store in Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

What shall we say then to those Scriptures which go so 
sore upon good works? As we read Matt. xxv. I was 
an hungred, and ye gave me meat, &c. and such like. 
Which all sound as though we should be justified, and ac- 
cepted unto the favour of God in Christ through good 
works. Thiswise answer I, Many there are, which when 
they hear or read of faith, at once they consent thereunto, 
and have a certain imagination or opinion of faith, as when 









Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 






a man telleth a story or a thing done in a strange land, that 
pertaineth not to them at all. Which yet they believe, and 
tell as a true thing. And this imagination or opinion they 
call faith. They think no farther than that faith is a thing 
which standeth in their own power to have, as to do other na- 
tural works which men work; but they feel no manner 
[of] working of the Spirit, neither the terrible sentence 
of the law, the fearful judgments of God, the horrible 
damnation and captivity under Satan. Therfore as soon 
as they have this opinion, or imagination in their hearts, 
that saith, Verely this doctrine seemeth true, I believe it is 
even so. Then they think that the right faith is there. 
But afterward when they feel in themselves, and also see in 
other, that there is none alteration, and that the works 
follow not, but that they are altogether even as before, and 
abide in their old estate; then think they that faith is not 
sufficient, but that it must be some greater thing than faith 
that should justify a man. 

So fall they away from faith again, and cry, saying, Faith 
only justifieth not a man, and maketh him acceptable to 
God. If thou ask them, Wherefore? they answer, See 
how many there are that believe, and yet do no more than 
they did before. These are they which Jude in his epis- 
tle calleth dreamers which deceive themselves with their 
own fantasies. For what other thing is their imagination 
which they call faith, than a dreaming of faith, and an 
opinion of their own imagination wrought without the grace 
of God? These must needs be worse at the latter end 
than at the beginning. These are the old vessels that rent 
when new wine is poured into them; (Mat. ix.) that is, they 
hear God's word, but hold it not, and therefore wax 
worse than they were before. But the right [faith] springeth 
not of man's fantasy, neither is it in any man's power to 
obtain it, but is altogether the pure gift of God poured 
into us freely, without all manner [of] doing of us, without 
deserving and merits, yea aud without seeking for of us. 
And is (as saith Paul in the second to the Ephesians) even 



tJOQ of 

true imlh* 



Faith lti2it 
brinfclli 
oat forth 
fruity U btit 
a dream. 



Mftt. II, 



Fiiiih k the 
gift of God. 



Eph. U* 



99 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



The Spi- 
rit of God 
ftccottifiHn]- 
etli fidtb. 



God's gift and grace purchased through Christ. There- 
fore is it mighty in operation, full of virtue, and ever 
working, which also reneweth a man, and begetteth him 
afresh, altereth him, changeth him, and turneth him alto- 
gether into a new nature and conversation, so that a man 
feeleth his heart altogether altered and changed, and far other- 
wise disposed than before, and hath power to love that 
which before he could not but hate, and delighteth in that 
which before he abhorred, and hateth that which before he 
could not but love. And it setteth the soul at liberty, and 
maketh her free to follow the will of God, and doth to the 
soul even as health doth unto the body; after that a man is 
pined and wasted away with a long soaking disease, the legs 
cannot bear him, he cannot lift up his hands to help himself, 
his taste is corrupt, sugar is bitter in his mouth, his stomach 
abhorreth [meat,] longing after slibbersause and swash, at 
which a whole stomach is ready to cast his gorge. When 
health cometh, she changeth and altereth him clean, giveth 
him strength in all his members, and lust to do of his own 
accord that which before he could not do, neither could 
suffer that any man exhorted him to do, and hath now 
lust in other things, and his members are free and at 
liberty, and have power to do of their own accord all 
things, which belong to an whole man to do, which afore 
they had no power to do, but were in captivity and 
bondage. So likewise in all things doth right faith to the 
soul. 

The Spint of God accompanieth faith, and bringeth 
with her light, wherewith a man beholdeth himself in the 
law of God, and seeth his miserable bondage and capti- 
vity, and humbleth himself, and abhorreth himself; she 
bringeth God's promises of all good things in Christ. God 
worketh with his word, and in his word. And as his word 
is preached, faith rooteth herself in the hearts of the elect, 
and as faith entereth, and the word of God is believed, the 
power of God looseth the heart from the captivity and 
bondage under sin, and knitteth and coupleth him to God, 






Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 






and to the will of God; altereth him, changeth him clean, 
fashioneth, and forgeth him anew, giveth him power to 
love, and to do that which before was impossible for him 
either to love or do, and turneth him unto a new nature, 
so that he loveth that which he before hated, and hateth that 
which he before loved; and is clean altered, and changed, 
and contrary disposed; and is knit and coupled fast to 
God's will, and naturally bringeth forth good works, that 
is to say, that which God commandeth to do, and not 
things of his own imagination. And that doth he of his 
own accord, as a tree bringeth forth fruit of her own accord.
And as thou needest not to bid a tree to bring forth fruit, 
so is there no law put unto him that believeth, and is jus- 
tified through faith (as saith Paul in the first Epistle to 
Timothy, the first chapter). Neither is it needful, for 
the law of God is written and graved in his heart, and his 
pleasure is therein. And as without commandment, but 
even of his own nature, he eateth, drinketh, seeth, heareth, 
talketh, and goeth, even so of his own nature, without co- 
action or compulsion of the law, bringeth he forth good 
works. And as a whole man, when he is athirst, tarrieth 
but for drink, and when he hungreth abideth but for meat, 
and then drinketh and eateth naturally; even so is the 
faithful ever athirst, and an hungred after the will of God, 
and tarrieth but for occasion. And whensoever an occa- 
sion is given, he worketh naturally the will of God: for 
this blessing is given to all them that trust in Christ's 
blood, that they thirst and hunger to do God's will He 
that hath not this faith, is but an unprofitable babler of 
faith and works, and wotteth neither what he bableth, nor 
what he meaneth, or whereunto his words pertain: for he 
feeleth not the power of faith, nor the working of the 
Spirit in his heart, but interpreteth the Scriptures, which 
speak of faith and works, after his own blind reason and 
foolish fantasies, and not of any feeling that he hath in his 
heart; — as a man rehearseth a tale of another man's 
mouth, and wotteth not whether it be so or no, as he saith,



Faiiii of 

herself 
brmgeth 
fortU ^ooil 

U, good 



True Uhh 
IB nol with- 
out good 
works. 



94 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 




Tnie faith 
artd good 
works are 
the f^t of 
OcmIp And 
come not 
of our- 
■elveSi 



nor hath any experience of the thing itself. Now doth the 
Scripture ascribe both faith and works, not to us, but 
to God only, to whom they belong only, and to whom 
they are appropriate, whose gift they are, and the proper 
work of his Spirit. 

Is it not a froward and perverse blindness, to teach how 
a man can do nothing of his own self, and yet presump- 
tuously take upon them the greatest and highest work of 
God, even to make faith in themselves of their own power, 
and of their own false imagination and thoughts? There- 
fore, I say, we must despair of ourselves, and pray God 
(as Christ's apostles did) to give us faith, and to encrease 
our faith. When we have that, we need no other thing 
more. For she bringeth the Spirit with her, and he not 
only teacheth us all things, but worketh them also mightily 
in us, and carrieth us through adversity, persecution, death, 
and hell, unto heaven and everlasting life. 



The di^r- 
ence be- 
tweeo fidse 
fiuthf and 
light fnith. 

A» the tree 

is known 
by hb fruit, 
so right 
faUh ia 
kaown hy 
Urr frui|» 






Mark diligently, therefore, seeing we are come to an- 
swer. The Scripture, (because of such dreams and feigned 
faith's sake) useth such manner of speakings of works, 
not that a man should thereby be made good to God-ward, 
or Justified; but to declare unto other, and to take of 
other the difference between false feigned faith, and right 
faith. For where right faith is, there bringeth she forth 
good works; if there follow not good works, it is (no 
doubt) but a dream and an opinion or feigned faith. 

Wherefore look, as the fruit maketh not the tree good, 
but declareth and testifieth outwardly that the tree is good, 
(as Christ saith) Every tree is known by his fruit; even 
so shall ye know the right faith by her fruit. 

Take for an ensample Mary that anointed Christ's feet. 
(Luke vii.) When Simon which had Christ to his house 
had condemned her, Christ defended her, and justified her, 
saying, Simon, I have a certain thing to say unto thee, and 
he said, Master, say on, There was a certain lender which 
had two debtors, the one owed five hundred pence, and 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



95 



the other fifty. When they had nothing to pay, he forgave 
both. Which of them, tell me, will love him most? Si- 
mon answered and said, I suppose that he to whom he for- 
gave most. And he said to him. Thou hast truly judged. 
And he turned him to the woman, and said unto Simon, 
Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine house, and 
thou gavest me no water to my feet; but she hath washed 
my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her 
head. Thou gavest me no kiss, but she, since the time I 
came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with
oil thou hast not anointed. And she hath anointed my feet
with costly and precious ointment. Wherefore I say unto 
thee, many sins are forgiven her, for she loveth much. To 
whom less is forgiven, the same doth love less, &c. 
Hereby, see we, that deeds and works are but outward 
signs of the inward grace of the bounteous and plenteous 
mercy of God, freely received without all merits of deeds, 
yea, and before all deeds. Christ teacheth to know the 
inward faith and love, by the outward deeds. Deeds are the 
fruits of love, and love is the fruit of faith. Love, and 
also the deeds, are great or small, according to the pro- 
portion of faith. Where faith is mighty and strong, there 
is love fervent, and deeds plenteous, and done with exceed- 
ing meekness: where faith is weak, there is love cold, 
and the deeds few, and seldom bear flowers and blossoms 
in winter. 

Simon believed, and had faith yet but weakly, and accord- 
lag to the proportion of his faith loved coldly, and had deeds 
thereafter: he had Christ unto a simple and bare feast only, 
and received him not with any great humanity. But Mary 
had a strong faith, and therefore burning love, and honour- 
able deeds, done with exceeding profound and deep meek- 
ness. On the one side she saw herself clearly in the law, 
both in what danger she was in, and cruel bondage un-
der sin, her horrible damnation, and also the fearful sen-
tence and judgment of God upon sinners. On the other
side she heard the gospel of Christ preached, and in the






THE PARABLE OP 



[Tyndale. 



Rom. 



Backward 
tioEiB. 



promises she saw with eagles' eyes the exceeding abundant 
mercy of God that passeth all utterance of speech, which 
is set forth in Christ for all meek sinners which knowledge 
their sins; and she believed the word of God mightily, and 
glorified God over his mercy and truth; and being over- 
come and overwhelmed with the unspeakable, yea, and in- 
comprehensible abundant riches of the kindness of God, 
did inflame and burn in love; yea, was so swollen in love, 
that she could not abide, nor hold, but must break out; and 
was so drunk in love that she regarded nothing, but even to 
utter the fervent and burning love of her heart only; she 
had no respect to herself, though she was never so great and 
notable a sinner; neither to the curious hypocrisy of the 
Pharisees, which ever disdain weak sinners; neither the 
costliness of her ointment; but with all humbleness did run un- 
to his feet; washed them with the tears of her eyes, and wiped 
them with the hairs of her head, and anointed them with 
her precious ointment; yea, and would no doubt have run 
into the ground under his feet, to have uttered her love to- 
ward him; yea would have descended down into hell, if it 
had been possible. Even as Paul in the ixth chapter of 
his Epistle to the Romans was drunk in love, and over- 
whelmed with the plenteousness of the infinite mercy of 
God, (which he had received in Christ unsought for) wished 
himself banished from Christ and damned, to save the Jews, 
if it might have been. For as a man feeleth God in himself, 
so is he to his neighbour. 

Mark another thing also. We, for the most part, because 
of our grossness in all our knowledge, proceed from that which 
is last and hindmost, unto that which is first; beginning at 
the latter end, disputing and making our arguments back- 
ward. We begin at the effect, and work and proceed unto 
the natural cause. As for an ensample: we first see the moon 
dark, and then search the cause, and find that the putting of 
the earth between the sun and the moon is the natural cause 
of the darkness, and that the earth stoppeth the light. Then 
dispute we backward, saying, the moon is darkened, there- 







Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 






fore is the earth directly between the sun and moon. Now 
yet is not the darkness of the moon the natural cause that 
the earth is between the sun and the moon, but the effect 
thereof, and cause declarative, declaring and leading us 
unto the knowledge, how that the earth is between the sun 
and the moon directly, and causeth the darkness, stopping 
the light of the sun from the moon. And contrarywise, the 
being of the earth directly between the sun and the moon 
is the natural cause of the darkness. Likewise he hath a son, 
therefore is he a father, and yet the son is not cause of the 
father, but contrarywise. Notwithstanding, the son is the 
cause declarative, whereby we know that the other is a 
father. After the same manner here, many sins are for- 
given her, for she loveth much, thou mayest not understand 
by the word for, that love is the natural cause of the for- 
giving of sins, but declareth it only; and contrariwise, the 
forgiveness of sins is the natural cause of love. 

The works declare love. And love declareth that there is 
some benefit and kindness shewed, or else would there be 
no love. Why worketh one and another not? or one more 
than another? because that one loveth and the other not, or 
that the one loveth more than the other. Why loveth one 
and another not, or one more than another? because that 
one feeleth the exceeding love of God in his heart and another
not, or that one feeleth it more than another. Scripture speak-
eth after the most gross manner. Be diligent therefore
that thou be not deceived, with curiousness, for men of no 
small reputation have been deceived with their own sophistry. 


Hereby now seest thou, that there is great difference 
between being righteous and good in a man's self, and de- 
claring and uttering righteousness and goodness. The 
faith only maketh a man safe, good, righteous, and the 
friend of God, yea, and the son and the heir of God, and of 
all his goodness, and possesseth us with the Spirit of God.
The work declareth the self faith and goodness. Now
useth the Scripture the common manner of speaking,



98 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



FiiHb poB- 
B'ess^tli tbe 
Spirit oi 

GtNl. 

Works de- 
clare fflltll 
fiDd G^'id's 
goodDe«a. 



Ib Io he. vx- 
irrcjseil in 



Wh^iT true 

Eaith iSf 

J:ckm1 works 
ollow. 



and the very same that is among the people. As when a fa- 
ther saith to his child, Go, and be loving, merciful, and good 
to such or such a poor man, he biddeth him not therewith 
to be made merciful, kind, and good, but to testify and 
declare the goodness that is in him already, with the out- 
ward deed, that it may break out to ihe profit of other, and 
that other may feel it which have need thereof. 

After the same manner shalt thou interpret the Scriptures 
which make mention of works: that God thereby will that 
we show forth that goodness which we have received by 
faith, and let it break forth and come to the profit of other, 
that the false faith may be known and weeded out by the 
roots. For God giveth no man his grace that he should let 
it lay still and do no good withal, but that he should en- 
crease it and multiply it with lending it to others, and with 
open declaring of it with the outward works, provoke and 
draw others to God. As Christ saith in Matthew the vth. 
chapter, Let your light so shine in the sight of men, that they 
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is 
in heaven. Or else where it is a treasure digged in the 
ground, and hid wisdom, in which what profit is there?

Moreover therewith the goodness, favour, and gifts of 
God which are in thee, not only shall be known unto other, 
but also unto thine own self, and thou shalt be sure that thy 
faith is right, and that the true Spirit of God is in thee, and 
that thou art called and chosen of God unto eternal life, 
and loosed from the bonds of Satan, whose captive thou 
wast; as Peter exhorteth in the First of his Second Epistle, 
through good works to make our calling and election 
(wherewith we are called and chosen of God) sure. For 
how dare a man presume to think that his faith is right, 
and that God's favour is on him, and that God's Spirit is 
in him, when he feeleth not the working of the Spirit, nei- 
ther himself disposed to any godly thing? Thou canst ne- 
ver know or be sure of thy faith but by the works, if works 
follow not, yea, and that of love, without loooking after any 
reward, thou mayest be sure that thy faith is but a dream, 







Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



and not right, and even the same that James called in his 
Epistle, the second chapter, dead faith and not justifying. 

Abraham through works, (Genesis xxiind) was sure of his
faith to be right, and that the true fear of God was in him, 
when he had offered his son, as the Scripture saith, Now 
know I that thou fearest God, that is to say, now is it 
open and manifest that thou fearest God, inasmuch as thou 
hast not spared thy only son for my sake. 



So now by this abide sure and fast, that a man inwardly 
in the heart and before God, is righteous and good through 
faith only, before all works: notwithstanding, yet out- 
wardly and openly before the people, yea, and before him- 
self, is he righteous through the work, that is, he know- 
eth and is sure through the outward work that he is a 
true believer, and in the favour of God, and righteous and 
good through the mercy of God: that thou mayest call the 
one an open and an outward righteousness, and the other, 
an inward righteousness of the heart; so yet, that thou un- 
derstand by the outward righteousness, no other thing save 
the fruit that followeth, and a declaring of the inward 
justifying and righteousness of the heart, and not that it 
maketh a man righteous before God, but that he must be first 
righteous before him in the heart; even as thou mayest call the 
fruit of the tree the outward goodness of the tree which fol- 
loweth and uttereth the inward natural goodness of the tree. 

This meaneth James in his Epistle, where he saith. Faith 
without works is dead, that is, if works follow not, it is a 
sure and an evident sign that there is no faith in the heart, but 
a dead imagination and dream, which they falsely call faith 

Of the same wise is this saying of Christ to be under- 
stood: Make you friends of the unrighteous mammon, that is, 
shew your faith openly and what ye are within in the heart, 
with outward giving and bestowing your goods on the poor, 
that ye may obtain friends; that is, that the poor on whom 
thou hast showed mercy may at the day of judgment, tes- 
tify and witness of thy good works. That thy faith and what 

H 2 



Tlie out* 
ward ri^lf 

und the iu« 

wlint Ihrf 
arc* 



Outward 
work* de- 
cljvre where 
true fAiUl 



100 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Good 

works nre 

for us 1>e- 
fare God. 



Mntl. vl 
aad viL 



thou wast within thy heart before God, may there appear 
by thy fruits openly to all men. For unto the right be- 
lieving shalt all things be comfortable, and unto consolation, 
at that terrible day: and contrariwise unto the unbelieving, 
all things shall be unto desperation and confusion, and 
every man shall be judged openly and outwardly, in the 
presence of all men, according to their deeds and works. 
So that not without a cause thou mayest call them thy 
friends which testify at that day of thee, that thou livedst as 
a true and a right christian man, and followedst the steps 
of Christ in shewing mercy, as no doubt he doth which 
feeleth God merciful in his heart. And by the works is the 
faith known, that it was right and perfect. For the outward 
works can never please God, nor make friend, except they 
spring of faith. Forasmuch as Christ himself (Matt. vi. and 
vii.) disalloweth and casteth away the works of the Pharisees, 
yea, prophesying and working of miracles and casting out 
of devils, which we count and esteem for very excellent 
virtues, yet make they no friends with their works, while 
their hearts are false and impure, and their eye double. 
Now without faith is no heart true or eye single, so that 
we are compelled to confess that the works make not a man 
righteous or good, but that the heart must first be righteous 
and good, ere any good work proceed thence. 



Matt, IS. 



Secondarily, all good works must be done free with a 
single eye, without respect of any thing, and that no profit 
be sought thereby. 

That commandeth Christ, where he saith, (Mat. x.) Freely 
have ye received, freely give again. For look, as Christ 
with all his works did not deserve heaven, for that was his 
already, but did us service therewith, and neither looked, 
nor sought his own profit, but our profit, and the honour 
of God the Father only; even so we, with all our works, 
may not seek our own profit neither in this world nor in 
heaven, but must, and ought, freely to work to honour God 
withal, and without all manner [of] respect, seek our 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



101 



neighbour's profit, and do him service. That meaneth 
Paul (Phil ii.) saying, Be minded as Christ was, which 
being in the shape of God, equal unto God, and even very 
God, laid that apart, that is to say hid it, and took on him 
the form and fashion of a servant. That is, as concerning 
himself he had enough, that he was full and had all plen- 
teousness of the Godhead, and in all his works sought our 
profit, and became our servant. 

The cause is: forasmuch as faith justifieth and putteth 
away sin in the sight of God, bringeth life, health, and the 
favour of God, maketh us the heirs of God, poureth the 
Spirit of God into our souls, and filleth us with all godly 
fulness in Christ; it were too great a shame, rebuke and 
wrong unto the faith, yea to Christ's blood, if a man would 
work any thing to purchase that wherewith faith hath en- 
dued him already, and God hath given him freely. Even 
as Christ had done rebuke and shame unto himself, if he 
would have done good works, and wrought to have been 
made thereby God's son and heir over all, which thing he 
was already. Now doth faith make us the sons or children 
of God. (John i.) He gave them might or power to be 
the sons of God, in that they believed on his name. If 
we be sons, so are we also heirs. (Rom. viii. and Gal iv.) 
How can or ought we then to work for to purchase that 
inheritance withal, whereof we are heirs already by faith? 

What shall we say then to those Scriptures, which sound 
as though a man should do good works, and live well for 
heaven's sake or eternal reward? As these are, Make 
you friends of the unrighteous mammon. And (Mat. vii.) 
Gather you treasures together in heaven. Also (Mat. 
xix.) If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments: 
and such like. This say I, that they which understand 
not, neither feel in their hearts what faith meaneth, talk 
and think of the reward, even as they do of the work; 
neither suppose they that a man ought to work, but in a 
respect to the reward. For they imagine, that it is in the 
kingdom of Christ, as it is in the world among men, that 



VMi mik- 
Hb itn tlie 

aoHS nrvd 
cltUdren of 
God. 

Rom* ri^i, 
Gu). h*. 






hn 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Tliey CfiftC 
■i'i:k huA- 
ifr> for 
Ihsrirw-orks 
nrc HucU ma 
nncltTstund 
nut the 
lri'iiiiiir<f3 of 



Mat* V. 



A« good 
works iia- 
l4irft]]y fol- 
low f^itb, 

so eterniil 
!tfe fotJaw- 
tftli faith 
and good 



As ptJod 
work a fol- 
liiir fnitb, 
■o tifIL f ol- 
io w^tli evil 
works. 



they must deserve heaven with their good works. Howbeit 
their thoughts are but dreams and false imaginations. Of 
these men speaketh Malachi (chap. i.) Who is it among 
you that shutteth a door for my pleasure for nought, that is 
without respect of reward? These are servants that 
seek gains and vantage, hirelings and day labourers, which 
here on earth receive their rewards, as the Pharisees with 
their prayers and fastings. (Mat. v.) 

But on this wise goeth it with heaven, with everlasting 
life and eternal reward: likewise as good works naturally 
follow faith (as it is above rehearsed) so that thou needest 
not to command a true believer to work, or to compel him 
with any law, for it is unpossible that he should not work; 
he tarrieth but for an occasion; he is ever disposed of him- 
self, thou needest but to put him in remembrance, and 
that to know the false faith from the true. Even so naturally 
doth eternal life follow faith and good living, without seeking 
for, and is impossible that it should not come, though no 
man thought thereon. Yet is it rehearsed in the Scripture, 
alleged and promised to know the difference between a 
false believer and a true believer, and that every man may 
know what followeth good living naturally and of itself, 
without taking thought for it. 

Take a gross ensample: hell, that is, everlasting death, is 
threatened unto sinners, and yet followeth it sin naturally 
without seeking for. For no man doth evil to be damned 
therefore, but had rather avoid it. Yet there the one fol- 
loweth the other naturally, and though no man told or 
warned him of it, yet should the sinner find it and feel it. 
Nevertheless it is therefore threatened, that men may know 
what followeth evil living. Now then as after evil living 
followeth his reward unsought for, even so after good living 
followeth his reward naturally unsought for, or unthought 
upon. Even as when thou drinkest wine, be it good or 
bad, the taste followeth of itself, though thou therefore 
drink it not. Yet testifieth the Scripture, and it is true, 
that we are by inheritance heirs of damnation; and that 





Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



ere we be born, we are vessels of the wrath of God, and 
full of that poison whence naturally all sins spring; and 
wherewith we cannot but sin, which thing the deeds that 
follow (when we behold ourselves in the glass of the law of 
God) do declare and utter, kill our consciences, and show 
us what we were and wist not of it, and certifieth us that 
we are heirs of damnation. For if we were of God we 
should cleave to God, and lust after the will of God. But 
now our deeds compared to the law declare the contrary, 
and by our deeds we see ourselves, both what we be and 
what our end shall be. 

So now thou seest that life eternal and all good things 
are promised unto faith and belief; so that he that be- 
lieveth on Christ shall be safe. Christ's blood hath pur- 
chased life for us, and hath made us the heirs of God; so 
that heaven cometh by Christ's blood. If thou wouldst 
obtain heaven with the merits and deservings of thine own 
works, so didst thou wrong, yea, and shamedst the blood 
of Christ, and unto thee were Christ dead in vain. Now 
is the true believer heir of God by Christ's deservings, yea, 
and in Christ was predestinate and ordained unto eternal 
life before the world began. And when the gospel is 
preached unto us, we believe the mercy of God, and in be- 
lieving we receive the Spirit of God, which is the earnest 
of eternal life, and we are in eternal life already, and feel 
already in our hearts the sweetness thereof, and are over- 
come with the kindness of God and Christ, and therefore 
love the will of God, and of love are ready to work freely, 
and not to obtain that which is given us freely, and whereof 
we are heirs already. 

Now when Christ saith, Make you friends of unrighteous 
Mammon: Gather you treasure together in heaven, and 
such like: thou seest that the meaning and intent is no 
other but that thou shouldst do good, and so will it follow 
of itself naturally, without seeking and taking of thought, 
that thou shalt find friends and treasure in heaven, and 
receive a reward. So let thine eye be single, and look 



^03 

or our- 
8?lrea ire 
ttre tlie ^Cfl- 
si:ls ril Ihc 

WfHtll of 

tifct? beira of 
ftHmrmtloi]. 



To betieve 
Christ is 
sal ratio D. 



To teck 
henven hy 
gooil worki 
were to de- 
rogate the 
dignity of 
the I'liiod 
of ChrLiL 



104 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



^11 tllHl IE 

footl U pur- 
duwetl lur 

ui by 
CfariiiC, 



SaIhU can- 
not lielp lis 



unto good living only, and take no thought for the reward, 
but be content. Forasmuch as thou knowest and art sure 
that the reward and all things contained in God's promises 
follow good living naturally; and thy good works do but 
testify only, and certify thee that the Spirit of God is in 
thee, whom thou hast received in earnest of God's truth; 
and that thou art heir of all the goodness of God, and that 
all good things are thine already, purchased by Christ's blood, 
and laid up in store against that day, when every man shall 
receive according to his deeds, that is according as his 
deeds declare and testify, what he is or was. For they 
that look unto the reward, are slow, false, subtle and crafty 
workers, and love the reward more than the work, yea, 
hate the labour, yea, hate God which commandeth the 
labour, and are weary both of the commandment, and 
also of the Commander, and work with tediousness. But 
he that worketh of pure love, without seeking of reward, 
worketh truly. 

Thirdly, that not the saints, but God only receiveth us 
into eternal tabernacles, is so plain and evident, that it 
needeth not to declare or prove it. How shall the saints 
receive us into heaven, when every man hath need for him- 
self that God only receive him to heaven, and every man 
hath scarce for himself? As it appeareth by the five wise 
virgins, (Mat. xxv.) which would not give of their oil unto 
the unwise virgins. And Peter saith in the ivth of his 
first Epistle, that the righteous is with difficulty saved. 
So seest thou the saying of Christ, Make you friends, and 
so forth, that they may receive you into everlasting taber- 
nacles, pertaineth not unto the saints which are in heaven, 
but is spoken of the poor and needy which are here present 
with us on earth; as though he should say. What, buildest 
thou churches, foundest abbeys, chauntries and colleges, 
in the honour of saints, to my Mother, St. Peter, Paul, and 
saints that be dead, to make of them thy friends? They 
need it not, yea, they are not thy friends, but theirs which 
lived then when they did, of whom they were holpen. 




Tyndale] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



105 



How wc 



To do good 
to such as 
are eril, is 
commeiid* 
able. 



Thy friends are the poor, which are now in thy time, and 
live with thee; thy poor neighbours which need thy help 
and succour. Them make thy friends with thy unrighteous
mammon, that they may testify of thy faith, and thou mayest
know and feel that thy faith is right and not feigned.

Unto the second, such receiving into everlasting habi- 
tations is not to be understood that men shall do it. For 
many, to whom we shew mercy and do good, shall not 
come there; neither skilleth it so we meekly and lovingly 
do our duty, yea, it is a sign of strong faith and fer- 
vent love, if we do well to the evil, and study to draw them 
to Christ in all that lieth in us. But the poor give us an 
occasion to exercise our faith, and the deeds make us feel 
our faith, and certify us and make us sure that we are safe, 
and are escaped and translated from death unto life, and 
that we are delivered and redeemed from the captivity and 
bondage of Satan, and brought into the liberty of the sons 
of God, in that we feel lust and strength in our heart to 
work the will of God. And at that day shall our deeds ap- 
pear and comfort our hearts, witness our faith and trust, 
which we now have in Christ, which faith shall then keep us 
from shame, as it is written, None that believeth in him shall 
be ashamed, (Rom. ix.) So that good works help our faith, 
and make us sure in our consciences, and make us feel the 
mercy of God. Notwithstanding, heaven, everlasting life, 
joy eternal, faith, the favour of God, the Spirit of God, lust 
and strength unto the will of God, are given us freely of the 
bounteous and plenteous riches of God, purchased by 
Christ, without our deservings, that no man should rejoice 
but in the Lord only. 

For a farther understanding of this gospel, here may be 
made three questions, What mammon is, Why it is called un- 
righteous, and after what manner Christ biddeth us coun- 
terfeit and follow the unjust and wicked steward, which with 
his Lord's damage provided for his own profit and vantage, 
which thing no doubt is unrighteous and sin? 



Rom. ix. 



All our ' 
righteoin-^ 
neas Com- 
eth freely 
from 
ChrUU 



106 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Main moil 
whitt U is. 



The dflvi 
are cmltcd 
erll, be- 
cause evil 
mea use 
them. 



We mn 

bound by 
the Ihw Qf 
natare to 
help our 

mfghhonu 



First, mammon is an Hebrew word, and signifies riches 
or temporal goods, and namely, all superfluity, and all that 
is above necessity, and that which is required unto our ne- 
cessary uses, wherewith a man may help another without 
undoing or hurting himself; for Hamon, in the Hebrew 
speech, signifies a multitude or abundance, or many, and 
there hence cometh mahamon, or mammon, abundance or 
plenteousness of good or riches. 

Secondarily, it is called unrighteous mammon, not be- 
cause it is got unrighteously, or with usury, for of unrighteous 
gotten goods can no man do good works, but ought to re- 
store them home again. As it is said (Isaiah lxi.) I am a 
God that hateth offering that cometh of robbery; and Solo- 
mon (Prov. iii.) saith, Honour the Lord of thine own good. 
But therefore it is called unrighteous, because it is in un- 
righteous use. As Paul speaketh unto the Ephesians vth 
how that The days are evil though that God hath made 
them, and they are a good work of God's making. How- 
beit they are yet called evil, because that evil men use them 
amiss, and much sin, occasions of evil, peril of souls are 
wrought in them. Even so are riches called evil because 
that evil men bestow them amiss and misuse them. For 
where riches are there goeth it after the common proverb, 
He that hath money hath what him listeth. And they cause 
flghting, stealing, laying await, lying, flattering, and all un- 
happiness against a man's neighbour. For all men hold on 
riches' part. 

But singularly before God is it called unrighteous mam- 
mon, because it is not bestowed and ministered unto our 
neighbour's need. For if my neighbour need and I give him 
not, neither depart liberally with him of that which I have, 
then withhold I from him unrighteously that which is his 
own. For as much as I am bounden to help him by the law 
of nature, which is Whatsoever thou wouldest that another 
did to thee, that do thou also to him; and Christ (Matt. v.) 
Give to every man that desireth thee; and John in his first 
Epistle, If a man have this world's good and see his brother 




Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



107 



need, how is the love of God in him? And this unrighteous- 
ness in our mammon see very few men: because it is spi- 
ritual, and in those goods which are gotten most truly and 
justly, which beguile men. For they suppose they do no man 
wrong in keeping them, in that they got them not with 
stealing, robbing, oppression, and usury, neither hurt any 
man now with them. 

Thirdly, many have busied themselves in studying what, 
or who, this unrighteous steward is, because that Christ so 
praiseth him. But shortly and plainly this is the answer. That 
Christ praiseth not the unrighteous steward, neither setteth 
him forth to us to counterfeit because of his unrighteousness, 
but because of his wisdom only, in that he, with unright, so 
wisely provided for himself. As if I would provoke another 
to pray or study, say, The thieves watch all night to rob 
and steal, why canst not thou watch to pray and to study? 
here praise not I the thief and murderer for their evil doing, 
but for their wisdom, that they so wisely and diligently wait 
on their unrighteousness. Likewise when I say miss women 
tire themselves with gold and silk to please their lovers: 
what wilt not thou garnish thy soul with faith to please 
Christ? here praise I not whoredom, but the diligence 
which the whore misuseth. 

On this wise Paul also (Rom. v.) likeneth Adam and 
Christ together, saying that Adam was a figure of Christ. 
And yet of Adam have we but pure sin, and of Christ grace 
only, which are out of measure contrary. But the similitude 
or likeness standeth in the original birth, and not in the vir- 
tue and vice of the birth. So that as Adam is father of all 
sin, so is Christ father of all righteousness: and as all sinners 
spring of Adam, even so all righteous men and women 
spring of Christ. After the same manner is here the un- 
righteous steward an ensample unto us, in his wisdom and 
diligence only, in that he provided so wisely for himself, 
that we with righteousness should be as diligent to provide 
for our souls as he with unrighteousness provided for his 
body. 



The on- 
righteous 
steward, 
who it is. 



Christ is 
the Father 
of all righ« 
teousness. 



108 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Likewise mayest thou solve all other texts which sound 
as though it were between us and God, as it is in the world, 
where the reward is more looked upon than the labour; 
yea, where men hate the labour, and work falsely with the 
body and not with the heart, and no longer than they are 
looked upon, that the labour may appear outward only. 



MatL T. 



ForChristV 
blood taket 

only 
tti rough 
fiiith, Goil 
tB nt one 
WtUl U£, 



When Christ saith (Matt. v.) Blessed are ye when 
they rail on you, and persecute you, and say all manner [of] 
evil sayings against you, and yet lie, and that for my sake, 
rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven. 
Thou mayest not imagine that our deeds deserve the joy 
and glory that shall be given unto us, for then Paul saith 
(Rom, xi.) Favour were not favour, I cannot receive it of 
favour and of the bounties of God freely, and by deserving 
of deeds also. But believe as the gospel, glad tidings and 
promises of God say unto thee, that far Christ's blood sake 
only, through faith, God is at one with thee, and thou re- 
ceived to mercy, and art become the son of God and heir 
annexed with Christ, of all the goodness of God, the earnest 
whereof is the Spirit of God poured into our hearts. Of 
which things the deeds are witnesses, and certify our con- 
sciences that our faith is unfeigned, and that the right 
Spirit of God is in us. For if I patiently suffer adversity and 
tribulation for conscience of God only, that is to say, be- 
cause I know God and testify the truth, then am I sure 
that God hath chosen me in Christ and for Christ's sake, 
and hath put in me his Spirit as an earnest of his promises, 
whose working I feel in mine heart, the deeds bearing wit- 
ness unto the same. Now is it Christ's blood only that de- 
served all the promises of God, and that which I suffer and 
do, is partly the curing, healing, and mortifying of my 
members, and killing of that original poison, wherewith I 
was conceived and born, that I might be altogether like 
Christ, and partly the doing of my duty to my neighbour, 
whose debtor I am of all that I have received of God; to 
draw him to Christ with all suffering, with all patience, and 




Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



109 



even with shedding my blood for him, not as an offering 
or merit for his sins, but as an ensample to provoke him. 
Christ's blood only puttelh away all the sin that ever 
was, is, or shall be, from them that are elect and repent, 
believing the gospel, that is to say, God's promises in
Christ. 



bloo<1 oq]^ 
piUtHti 



Again in the same vth chapter, Love your enemies, 
bless them that curse you, do well to them that hate you 
and persecute you, that ye may be sons of your father 
which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun shine upon 
evil, and on good, and sendeth his rain upon just 
and unjust. Not that our works make us the sons 
of God, but testify only, and certify our consciences, 
that we are the sons of God, and that God hath chosen 
us, and washed us in Christ's blood, and hath put his 
Spirit in us. And it followeth, If ye love them that love 
you, what reward have ye? do not the Publicans even the 
same? and if ye shall have favour to your friends only, 
what singular thing do ye? do not the Publicans even the 
same? Ye shall be perfect therefore, as your Father 
which is in heaven is perfect. That is to say, if that ye do 
nothing but that the world doth, and they which have the 
spirit of the world, whereby shall ye know that ye are the 
sons of God, and beloved of God more than the world? 
But, and if ye counterfeit, and follow God in well 
doing, then no doubt it is a sign that the Spirit of God 
is in you, and also the favour of God, which is not in 
the world, and that ye are inheritors of all the promises 
of God, and elect unto the fellowship of the blood of 
Christ. 



We must 
follow 
CUmt ID 
well doiwy* 



Also (Matt. vi.) Take heed to your alms, that ye do
it not in the sight of men, to the intent that ye would be 
seen of them, or else have ye no reward with your Father 
which is in heaven. Neither cause a trumpet to be blown 
afore thee when thou doest thine alms, as the hypocrites 



110 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Wc mny 

Cot fto gnod 
works to liti 
praised of 
thie world. 



We must 
do to our 
neighbour 
u God lA to 



do in the synagogues, and in the streets, to be glorified of 
the world. But when thou doest thine alms, let not thy left 
hand know what thy right hand doth; that thy alms may 
be in secret, and thy Father which seeth in secret shall 
reward thee openly. This putteth us in remembrance of 
our duty, and sheweth what followeth good works; not 
that works deserve it, but that the reward is laid up for us 
in store, and we thereunto elect through Christ's blood, 
which the works testify: for, if we be worldly minded, 
and do our works as the world doth, how shall we know 
that God hath chosen us out of the world? But and if 
we work freely, without all manner [of] worldly respect, 
to shew mercy, and to do our duty to our neighbour, and 
to be unto him as God is to us, then are we sure that the 
favour and mercy of God is upon us, and that we shall 
enjoy all the good promises of God through Christ, which 
hath made us heirs thereof. 



Hj^poeTitea 
Mck to be 
praUed of 



Rom, n. 



Fnith only 

mod no 
good irortu! 
c&n be dooe 
without 
faith. 



Also, in the same chapter it followeth, When thou prayest, 
be not as the hypocrites, which love to stand and pray in the 
synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, for to be seen 
of men. But when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, 
and shut thy door to, and pray to thy Father which is in 
secret, and thy Father which seeth in secret, shall reward 
thee openly. And likewise, when we fast (teacheth Christ 
in the same place) that we should behave ourselves that it 
appear not unto men how that we fast, but unto our Father 
which is in secret, and our Father which seeth in secret, 
shall reward us openly. These two texts do but declare 
what followeth good works, for eternal life cometh not by 
the deserving of works, but is, (saith Paul, in the vith to 
the Romans) the gift of God through Jesus Christ. Nei- 
ther do our works justify us. For except we were justified 
by faith which is our righteousness, and had the Spirit 
of God in us, to teach us, we could do no good work 
freely, without respect of some profit, either in this world, 
or in the world to come; neither could we have spiritual 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



111 



joy in our hearts in time of affliction, and mortifying of 
the flesh. 

Good works are called the fruits of the Spirit, (Gal v.) 
for the Spirit worketh them in us, and sometime fruits of 
righteousness, as in the second Epistle to the Corinthians 
and ixth chapter. Before all works therefore, we must have 
a righteousness within in the heart, the mother of all works, 
and from whence they spring. The righteousness of the 
Scribes and Pharisees, and of them that have the spirit of 
this world, is the glorious shew and outward shining of 
works. But Christ saith to us (Mat. v.) Except your 
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and 
Pharisees ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. It 
is righteousness in the world if a man kill not. But a chris- 
tian perceiveth righteousness if he love his enemy, even 
when he suffereth persecution and torment of him, and the 
pains of death, and mourneth more for his adversary's 
blindness than for his own pain, and prayeth God to open 
his eyes and to forgive him his sins, as did Stephen in the 
Acts of the Apostles the viith chapter, and Christ, Luke 
xxiii.

A Christian considereth himself in the law of God, 
and there putteth off him all manner [of] righteousness. 
For the law suffereth no merits, no deservings, no righte- 
ousness, neither any man to be justified in the sight of 
God. The law is spiritual and requireth the heart and 
commandments to be fulfilled with such love and obedience 
as was in Christ. If any fulfil all that is the will of God 
with such love and obedience, the same may be bold to 
sell pardons of his merits, and else not. 

A Christian therefore when he beholdeth himself in the 
law, putteth off all manner [of] righteousness, deservings 
and merits, and meekly and unfeignedly knowledgeth his 
sin and misery, his captivity and bondage in the flesh, his 
trespass and guilt, and is thereby blessed with the poor in 
spirit, (Mat. chap. v.) Then he mourneth in his heart, 
because he is in such bondage that he cannot do the will of 



Good 
works nre 
the fruits 
of fiuni. 



Tfuc rlgh- 
teouanesE 
what it la. 



Acts vii* 
Luke x3tiiiHi 



•mm^ 



i l i*» i« 



m ^lw 1*1 



■ « M# ■ 



■WW 



112 



True righ- 
teousness 
springeth 
out of 
Chri«t*8 
blood. 



Truefast- 
iog what it 
is. 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



No flesh 
can fulfil 
the law. 



God, and is an hungred and athirst after righteousness. 
For righteousness (I mean) which springeth out of Christ's 
blood, for strength to do the will of God. And turneth 
himself to the promises of God, and desireth him for his 
great mercy and truth, and for the blood of his son Christ 
to fulfil his promises and to give him strength. And thus 
his Spirit ever prayeth within him. He fasteth also not one 
day for a week, or a lent for an whole year, but professeth 
in his heart a perpetual soberness, to tame the flesh, and to 
subdue the body to the Spirit, until he wax strong in the 
Spirit, and grow ripe into a full righteousness after the 
fulness of Christ. And because this fulness happeneth 
not till the body be slain by death, a christian is ever a 
sinner in the law, and therefore fasteth and prayeth to God 
in the Spirit, the world seeing it not. Yet in the promises 
he is ever righteous through faith in Christ, and is sure that 
he is heir of all God's promises, the Spirit which he hath 
received in earnest, bearing him witness, his heart also, and 
his deeds testifying the same. 

Mark this then: To see inwardly that the law of God is 
so spiritual, that no flesh can fulfil it. And then for to 
mourn and sorrow and to desire, yea to hunger and thirst 
after strength to do the will of God from the ground of 
the heart, and, (notwithstanding all the subtilty of the devil, 
weakness and feebleness of the flesh, and wondering of 
the world,) to cleave yet to the promises of God, and to 
believe that for Christ's blood sake thou art received to the 
inheritance of eternal life, is a wonderful thing, and a 
thing that the world knoweth not of; but whosoever feeleth 
that, though he fall a thousand times in a day, doth yet rise 
again a thousand times, and is sure that the mercy of God 
is upon him. 


If ye forgive other men their trespasses, your heavenly 
Father shall forgive you yours. (Mat. chap. vi.) If I 
forgive, God shall forgive me, not for my deeds sake, but 
for his promises' sake, for his mercy and truth, and for the 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



113 



blood of his Son, Christ our Lord. And my forgiving
certifieth my spirit that God shall forgive me, yea that he
hath forgiven me already. For if I consent to the will of
God in my heart, though through infirmity and weakness 
I cannot do the will of God at all times; moreover though 
I cannot do the will of God so purely as the law requireth 
it of me, yet if I see my fault and meekly knowledge my 
sin, weeping in mine heart, because I cannot do the will of 
God I and thirst after strength, I am sure that the Spirit of 
God is in me, and his favour upon me. For the world 
lusteth not to do the will of God, neither sorroweth because 
he cannot, though he sorrow some time for fear of the pain 
that he believeth shall follow. He that hath the spirit of 
this world cannot forgive without amends making, or a 
greater vantage. If I forgive now how cometh it? Verily 
because I feel the mercy of God in me. For as a man 
feeleth God to himself, so is he to his neighbour. I know 
by mine own experience, that all flesh is in bondage under 
sin, and cannot but sin, therefore am I merciful, and desire 
God to loose the bonds of sin even in mine enemy. 



A Irue bc- 
etowm^ o/ 



Gather not treasure together in earth, &c. (Mat. vi.)
but gather you treasure in heaven, &c. Let not your 
hearts be glued to worldly things, study not to heap treasure 
upon treasure, and riches upon riches, but study to bestow 
well that which is gotten already, and let your abundance 
succour the lack and need of the poor which have not. 
Have an eye to good works, to which if ye have lust 
and also power to do them, then are ye sure that the Spirit 
of God is in you, and ye in Christ elect to the reward of 
eternal life which followeth good works. But look that 
thine eye be single and rob not Christ of his honour, 
ascribe not that to the deserving of thy works, which is 
given thee freely by the merits of his blood. In Christ we 
are sons; in Christ we are heirs; in Christ God chose us 
and elected us before the beginning of the world, created 
us anew by the word of the gospel, and put his Spirit in 

VOL II. I 



In Cliriii 

we arc alt 



114 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



We tnnst 
do irood 
wotkfl he- 
cmitic It lA 
God'fi will 
I hut wt 
^intiiild da 



We muat 
hear ihv 
word of 
(Jod AOJ 
do it. 



us for because we should do good works. A Christian 
man worketh, because it is the will of his Father only. 
If we do no good work, nor be merciful, how is our lust 
therein? If we have no lust to do good works, how is 
God's Spirit in us? If the Spirit of God be not in us, 
how are we his sons? How are we his heirs, and heirs 
annexed with Christ of the eternal life, which is promised 
to all them that believe in him? Now do our works tes- 
tify and witness what we are, and what treasure is laid up 
for us in heaven, so that our eye be single, and look upon 
the commandment without respect of anything save because 
it is God's will, and that God desireth it of us, and Christ 
hath deserved that we do it. 

Not all they that say unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter in- 
to the kingdom of heaven, but he that doth the will of 
my Father which is in heaven. (Mat. vii.) Though thou 
canst laud God with thy lips, and call Christ Lord, and 
canst babble and talk of the Scripture, and knowest all the 
stories of the Bible, yet shalt thou thereby never know 
thine election, or whether thy faith be right. But if thou 
feel lust in thine heart to the will of God, and bringest 
forth the fruits thereof, then hast thou confidence and hope; 
and thy deeds, and also the Spirit whence thy deeds spring 
certify thine heart that thou shalt enter, yea, art already 
entered into the kingdom of heaven. For it followeth, 
He that heareth the word and doth it buildeth his house 
upon a rock, and no tempest of temptations can over- 
throw it. For the Spirit of God is in his heart and com- 
forteth him, and holdeth him fast to the rock of the 
merits of Christ's blood, in whom he is elect. Nothing 
is able to pluck him out of the hands of God, God is 
stronger than all things. And contrariwise, he that 
heareth the word, and doth it not, buildeth on the sand of 
his own imagination, and every tempest overthroweth his 
building. The cause is, he hath not God's Spirit in him, 
and therefore understandeth it not aright, neither worketh 
aright. For no man knoweth the things of God (saith 




Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



Paul in the 1st Epistle to the Corinthians in the iind chap-
ter) save the Spirit of God, as no man knoweth what is in 
a man but a mans spirit which is in him. So then if the 
Spirit be not in a man he worketh not the will of God, 
neither understandeth it, though he babble never so much 
of the Scriptures. Nevertheless such a man may work after 
his own imagination, but God's will can he not work, he 
may offer sacrifice, but to do mercy knoweth he not. It is 
easy to say unto Christ, Lord, Lord, but thereby shalt thou 
never feel or be sure of the kingdom of heaven. But and if 
thou do the will of God, then art thou sure that Christ is 
thy Lord indeed and that thou in him art also a lord, in 
that thou feelest thyself loosed and freed from the bondage 
of sin, and lusty and of power to do the will of God. 

Where the Spirit is there is feeling; for the Spirit maketh 
us feel all things. Where the Spirit is not there is no feeling,
but a vain opinion or imagination. A physician serveth
but for sick men, and that for such sick men as feel their
sicknesses, and mourn therefore and long for health.
Christ likewise serveth but for sinners only as feel their sin, 
and that for such sinners that sorrow and mourn in their 
hearts for health. Health is power or strength to fulfil the 
law, or to keep the commandments. Now he that longeth 
for that health, that is to say, for to do the law of God, is 
blessed in Christ, and hath a promise that his lust shall be 
fulfilled, and that he shall be made whole. (Matt. v.) 
Blessed are they which hunger and thirst for righteousness' 
sake, (that is, to fulfil the law,) for their lust shall be fulfilled. 
This longing and consent of the heart unto the law of God, 
is the working of the Spirit which God hath poured into 
thine heart, in earnest that thou mightest be sure that God 
will fulfil all his promises that he hath made thee. It is 
also the seal and mark which God putteth on all men 
that he choseth unto everlasting life. So long as thou 
seest thy sin and mournest and consentest to the law, and 
longest (though thou be never so weak) yet the Spirit shall 
keep thee in all temptations from desperation, and certify 



116 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Chriftt it 
our Pincbor- 
hold to mI« 
vatioQ. 



thine heart that God for his truth shall deliver thee and save 
thee, yea, and by thy good deeds shalt thou be saved, not 
which thou hast done, but which Christ has done for thee, 
For Christ is thine and all his deeds are thy deeds. Christ 
is in thee and thou in him, knit together inseparably. Neither 
canst thou be damned except Christ be damned with thee: 
neither can Christ be saved except thou be saved with him. 
Moreover thy heart is good, right, holy and just, for thy 
heart is no enemy to the law but a friend and a lover. The 
law and thy heart are agreed and at one, and therefore is God 
at one with thee. The consent of the heart unto the law, 
is unity and peace between God and man. For he is not 
mine enemy which would fain do me pleasure, and mourneth 
because he hath not wherewith. Now he that opened thy 
disease unto thee and made thee long for health, shall, as 
he hath promised, heal thee, and he that hath loosed thy 
heart, shall at his godly leisure, loose thy members. He 
that hath not the Spirit hath no feelings neither lusteth or 
longeth after power to fulfil the law, neither abhorreth the 
pleasures of sin, neither hath any more certainty of the pro- 
mises of God, than I have of a tale of Robin Hood, or 
of some jest that a man telleth me was done at Rome. 
Another man may lightly make me doubt or believe the 
contrary, seeing I have no experience thereof myself; so is it 
of them that feel not the working of the Spirit, and therefore 
in time of temptation the buildings of their imaginations fall. 



WlMt 



prophel 
iMt lie ] 



He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, that 
is, because he is a prophet, shall receive the reward of a 
prophet; and He that giveth one of these little ones a cup 
of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, shall not 
loose his reward, (Matt. x.) Note this, that a prophet sig- 
nifieth as well him that interpreteth the hard places of Scrip- 
ture as him that prophesieth things to come. Now he that 
receiveth a prophet, a just man, or a disciple, shall have the 
same or like reward, that is to say, shall have the same 
eternal life which is appointed for them in Christ's blood 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



117 



and merits. For except thou were elect to the same eternal 
life and hadst the same faith and trust in God, and the same 
Spirit, thou couldst never consent to their deeds and help 
them. But thy deeds testify what thou art, and certify thy 
conscience that thou art received to mercy, and sanctified 
in Christ's passions and sufferings, and shalt hereafter, with 
all them that follow God, receive the reward of eternal life. 

Of thy words thou shalt be justified, and of thy words 
thou shalt be condemned; (Matt. xii.) That is, thy words 
as well as other deeds shall testify with thee or against thee 
at the day of judgment. Many there are which abstain 
from the outward deeds of fornication and adultery, never- 
theless rejoice to talk thereof and laugh; their words and 
laughter testify against them that their heart is impure, and 
they adulterers and fornicators in the sight of God. The 
tongue and other signs ofttimes utter the malice of the 
heart though a man for many causes abstain his hand from 
the outward deed or act. 

If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments; 
(Matt. xix.) First, remember that when God commandeth 
us to do any thing, he doth it not therefore because that we 
of ourselves are able to do that he commandeth; but that 
by the law we might see and know our horrible damnation 
and captivity under sin, and [therefore] should repent and 
come to Christ, and receive mercy and the Spirit of God to 
loose us, strengthen us, and to make us able to do God's 
will, which is the law. Now when he saith, If thou will en- 
ter into life keep the commandments, is as much [as] to say, 
as he that keepeth the commandments is entered into life: 
for except a man have first the Spirit of life in him by 
Christ's purchasing, it is impossible for him to keep the 
commandments, or that his heart should be loose or at liberty 
to lust after them, for of nature we are enemies to the law 
of God. 

As touching that, Christ saith afterward. If thou will be 
perfect go, and sell thy substance and give it to the poor; 
he saith it not as who should say that there were any greater 



Malt lit. 



Tlie su- 
staining 
from «in 
iJiUwftrilJy 
in but by- 
fiocriny. 



MatL XIX. 



To Where 
iinfelj|||:nctlv 

to keojt tlic 
comnmud* 




Tbe Iftw IS 

Hid retjuir- 
K\h the 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



If m Hrh 
lielpaolibe 
poor in 
Ibrir aeedt 
ihcf Are 
liijt tbdvet 
be forr God, 



perfection than to keep the law of God, (for that is all per- 
fection,) but to shew the other his blindness, which saw not 
that the law is spiritual, and requireth the heart. But 
because he was not knowing that he had hurt any man with 
the outward deed, he supposed that he loved his neighbour 
as himself. But when he was bid to shew the deeds of 
love, and give of his abundance to them that needed, he de- 
parted mourning. Which is an evident token that he 
loved not his neighbour as well as himself. For if he had 
need himself, it would not have grieved him to have re- 
ceived succour of another man. Moreover, he saw not that it 
was murder and theft, that a man should have abundance 
of riches lying by him, and not to shew mercy therewith, 
and kindly to succour his neighbour's need. God hath 
given one man riches to help another at need. If thy 
neighbour need, and thou help him not, being able, thou 
withholdest his duty from him, and art a thief before God. 

That also, that Christ saith, how that it is harder for a 
rich man (who loveth his riches so that he cannot find in 
his heart liberally and freely to help the poor and needy) 
to enter into the kingdom of heaven, than a camel to go 
through the eye of a needle, declareth that he was not en- 
tered into the kingdom of heaven, that is to say, eternal 
life. But he that keepeth the commandments is entered 
into life, yea, hath life and the Spirit of life in him. 



This kind of devils goeth not out but by prayer and 
fasting, (Mat. xxvii.) Not that the devil is cast out by 
merits of fasting or praying. For he saith before, that for 
their unbelief's sake, they could not cast him out. It is 
faith no doubt that casteth out the devils, and faith it is 
that fasteth and prayeth. Faith hath the promises of God 
whereunto she cleaveth, and in all things thirsteth [for] the 
honour of God. She fasteth to subdue the body unto the 
spirit that the prayer be not let, and that the spirit may 
quietly talk with God: she also, whensoever opportunity is 
given, prayeth God to fulfil his promises unto his praise 



FiiUh coat 

rth out 



FAitb fust 
ellu 



Falib pray 
Ptb. 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



119 



In Christ's 
blood we 
are blessed 
from the 
curse of 
the law. 



aod glory. And God, which is merciful in promising, and 
true to fulfil them, casteth out the devils, and doth all that 
faith desireth, and satisfieth her thirst. 

Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the beginning of the world; for I 
was athirst, and ye gave me drink, &c. (Mat. xxv.) Not
that a man with works deserveth eternal life as a workman 
or labourer his hire or wages. Thou readest in the text, 
that the kingdom was prepared for us from the beginning of 
the world. And we are blessed and sanctified. In Christ's 
blood are we blessed from that bitter curse and damnable 
captivity under sin, wherein we were born and conceived. 
And Christ's Spirit is poured into us, to bring forth good 
works, and our works are the fruits of the Spirit, and the 
kingdom is the deserving of Christ's blood, and so is faith 
and the Spirit and good works also. Notwithstanding the 
kingdom followeth good works, and good works testify that 
we are heirs thereof, and at the day of judgment shall they 
testify for the elect unto their comfort and glory: and to 
the confusion of the ungodly, unbelieving and faithless 
sinners, which had not trust in the word of God's pro- 
mises, nor lust to the will of God; but were carried of 
the spirit of their father the devil unto all abomination, to 
work wickedness with all lust, delectation, and greediness. 

Many sins are forgiven her, for she loveth much; 
(Luke vii.) Not that love was cause of forgiveness of sins,
but contrariwise the forgiveness of sins caused love, as it 
followeth, to whom less was forgiven that same loveth less. 
And afore he commended the judgment of Simon, which 
answered that he loveth most to whom most was forgiven: 
and also said at the last, Thy faith hath saved thee (or 
made thee safe) go in peace. We cannot love except we 
see some benefit and kindness. As long as we look on
the law of God only, where we see but sin and damnation
and the wrath of God upon us, yea where we were damned 



120 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



eonifortetli 
ftod mnketh 
Mft safe. 



Certain 
fliniBes of 

S|MCCeh t3L- 

potiaded* 



John IT* 



afore we were born we cannot love God. No, we cannot 
but hate him as a tyrant, unrighteous, unjust, and 
flee from him as did Cain. But when the gospel, that [those] 
glad tidings and joyful promises are preached, how that in 
Christ, God loveth us first, forgiveth us, and hath mercy on 
us, then love we again, and the deeds of our love declare 
our faith. This is the manner of speaking: as we say, 
Summer is nigh, for the trees blossom. Now is the blos- 
soming of the trees not the cause that summer draweth 
nigh; but the drawing nigh of summer is the cause of 
the blossoms, I and the blossoms put us in remembrance 
that summer is at hand. So Christ here teacheth Simon 
by the ferventness of love in the outward deeds, to see a 
strong faith within whence so great love springeth. As 
the manner is to say, Do your charity, shew your charity, 
do a deed of charity, shew your mercy, do a deed of mercy, 
meaning thereby that our deeds declare how we love our 
neighbours, and how much we have compassion on them 
at their need. Moreover it is not possible to love except 
we see a cause. Except we see in our hearts the love and 
kindness of God to usward in Christ our Lord, it is not 
possible to love God aright. 

We say also, He that lovetb not my dog loveth not me. 
Not that a man should love my dog first, but if a man 
loved me, the love wherewith he loved me would compel 
him to love my dog, though the dog deserved it not, yea, 
though the dog had done him a displeasure, yet if he loved 
me, the same love would refrain him from revenging himself, 
and cause him to refer the vengeance unto me. Such 
speakings find we in Scripture; John in the ivth of his 
first Epistle saith, He that saith I love God, and yet hateth 
his brother, is a liar; For how can he that loveth not his 
brother whom he seeth, love God whom he seeth not? 
This is not spoken that a man should first love his brother 
and then God, but as it followeth: For this commandment 
have we of him, that he which loveth God should love his 
brother also. To love my neighbour is the commandment; 



1 

4 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



121 



which commandment he that loveth not, loveth not God. 
The keeping of the commandment declareth what love I
have to God. If I loved God purely, nothing that my
neighbour could do were able to make me either to hate
him, either to take vengeance on him myself, seeing that
God hath commanded me to love him, and to remit all 
vengeance unto him. Mark now, how much I love the com- 
mandment, so much I love God; how much I love God, 
so much believe I that he is merciful, kind and good, yea, 
and a father unto me for Christ's sake. How much I believe 
that God is merciful unto me, and that he will for 
Christ's sake fulfil all his promises unto me; so much I 
see my sins, so much do my sins grieve me, so much do 
I repent and sorrow that I sin, so much displeaseth me 
that poison that moveth me to sin, and so greatly desire I 
to be healed. So now by the natural order, first I see my 
sin; then I repent and sorrow; then believe I God's pro- 
mises, that he is merciful unto me, and forgiveth me, and 
will heal me at the last: then love I, and then I prepare 
myself to the commandment. 

This do and thou shalt live. (Luke x.) That is to say,
Love thy Lord God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neigh-
bour as thyself. As who should say, if thou do this, or
though thou canst not do it, yet if thou feelest lust there-
unto, and thy spirit sigheth, mourneth, and longeth after 
strength to do it, take a sign and evident token thereby, 
that the Spirit of life is in thee, and that thou art elect to 
life everlasting by Christ's blood, whose gift and purchase 
is thy faith, and that Spirit that worketh the will of God 
in thee, whose gift also are thy deeds, or rather the deeds 
of the Spirit of Christ, and not thine, and whose gift is 
the reward of eternal life, which followeth good works. 

It followeth also in the same place of Luke, When he 
should depart he plucked out twopence and gave them to 
the host and said unto him, Take the charge or cure of him, 




122 



The tme 

stttJiding of 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



We iQitst 
e per be reji* 
dyto liclp 
our ucigh- 
bour. 



and whatsoever thou spendest more I will recompesne it 
thee at my coming again. Remember, this is a parable, and 
a parable may not be expounded word for word; but the ta- 
lent of the similitude must be sought but only in the whole pa- 
rable. The intent of the similitude is to shew to whom a man 
is a neighbour or who is a man's neighbour, which is both 
one, and what is to love a man's neighbour as himself. 

The Samaritan helped him and shewed mercy as long 
as he was present, and when he could be no longer 
present, he left his money behind him, And if that were not 
sufficient, he left his credence to make good the rest, and 
forsook him not as long as the other had need. Then said 
Christ, Go thou and do likewise; that is, without difference 
or respection of persons: whosoever needeth thy help, him 
count thy neighbour, and his neighbour be thou, and shew 
mercy on him as long as he needeth thy succour, and that 
is to love a man's neighbour as himself. Neighbour is a 
word of love, and signifieth that a man should be ever nigh 
and at hand, and ready to help in time of need. 

They that will interpret parables word by word, fall into 
straights ofttimes, whence they cannot rid themselves; and 
preach lies instead of the truth. As do they which interpret 
by the twopence, the Old Testament and the New, and by 
that which is bestowed Opera supererogationis. Howbeit 
Superarrogantia were a meeter term. That is to say, deeds 
which are more than the law requireth, deeds of perfection 
and of liberality which a man is not bound to do but of his 
free will: and for them he shall have an higher place in hea- 
ven and may give to other of his merits; or of which the 
Pope after his death may give pardons from the pains 
of purgatory. 

Against which exposition I answer; first, a greater per- 
fection than the law is there not. A greater perfection 
than to love God and his will, which is the commandments, 
with all thine heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, 
with all thy mind, is there none; and to love a man's 
neighbour as himself is like the same. It is a wonderful 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



123 



love wherewith a man loveth himself. As glad as I would 
be to receive pardon of mine own life, (if I had deserved 
death) so glad ought I to be to defend my neighbour's life 
without respect of my life, or of my good. A man ought 
neither to spare his goods nor yet himself for his brother's 
sake, after the ensample of Christ (1 John iii.) Herein 
saith he, perceive we love, in that he, that is to say Christ, 
gave his life for us, we ought therefore to bestow our lives 
for the brethren. Now saith Christ, (John xv.) There is 
no greater love than that a man bestow his life for his friend. 

Moreover no man can fulfil the law, for John saith (1st 
chapter of the said Epistle,) If we say we have no sin, we 
deceive ourselves and truth is not in us, if we knowledge 
our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins 
and to purge us from all iniquity. And in the Paternoster 
also we say, Father, forgive us our sins. Now if we be all 
sinners, none fulfilleth the law: for he that fulfilleth the law 
is no sinner. In the law: may neither Peter nor Paul nor 
any other creature save Christ only rejoice. In the blood 
of Christ, which fulfilled the law for us, may every person 
that repenteth, believeth, loveth the law, and mourneth for 
strength to fulfil it, rejoice, be he never so weak a sinner. 
The twopence therefore and the credence that he left be- 
hind him to bestow more, if need were, signifieth that he 
was everywhere merciful, both present and absent, without 
feigning, cloaking, complaining, or excusing, and forsake not 
his neighbour as long as he has need. Which example I 
pray God men may follow; and let opera supererogationis 
alone. 



Jdhn lit 



^VorliA ibiit 
the Pupbtf 

roortr than 
the Iftw rc- 
qiiirf^lb. 



Mary hath chosen a good part which shall not be taken 
from her, (Luke x.) She was first chosen of God and called 
by grace, both to know her sin and also to hear the word 
of faith, health, and glad tidings of mercy in Christ; and 
faith was given her to believe, and the Spirit of God loosed 
her heart from the bondage of sin: then consented she to 
the will of God again, and above all things had delectation 



Lnkc 1, 



124 



Luke itK 



What- 

aocver we 
bATC were- 
ceivi3 it of 
tbe mofcy 



The greiil 
^iFeriitjf 
and man- 
ner of the 
Bpeakiaf of 
the Scrip- 
turtfl, 




THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



to hear the word wherein she had obtained everlasting health, 
and namely, of his own mouth, which had purchased so 
great mercy for her. God chooseth us first and loveth us 
first, and openeth our eyes to see his exceeding abundant 
love to us in Christ, and then love we again, and accept his 
will above all things, and serve him in that office whereunto 
he hath chosen us. 

Sell that ye have, and give alms, and make you bags 
which wax not old, and treasure which faileth not in heaven. 
(Luke xii.) This and such like are not spoken that we should 
work as hirelings in respect of reward, and as though we 
should obtain heaven with merit: for he saith a little afore, 
Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father's pleasure to give 
you a kingdom. The kingdom cometh then of the good will 
of Almighty God Uirough Christ, and such things are spoken 
partly to put us in remembrance of our duty to be kind 
again. As is that saying, Let your light so shine before 
men that they, seeing your good works, may glorify your 
Father which is in heaven: as who should say, if God 
hath given you so great gifts see ye be not unthankful, but 
bestow them unto his praise. Some things are spoken to 
move us to put our trust in God, as are these; Behold the 
lilies of the field; Behold the birds of the air: If your 
children ask you bread will ye proffer them a stone? and many 
such like. Some are spoken to put us in remembrance to 
be sober, to watch and pray, and to prepare ourselves 
against temptations, and that we should understand and 
know how that temptations and occasion of evil come then 
most, when they are least looked for; lest we should be 
careless and sure of ourselves, negligent and unprepared. 
Some things are spoken that we should fear the wonder- 
ful and incomprehensible judgments of God lest we should 
presume. Some to comfort us that we despair not. And for 
like causes are all the ensamples of the Old Testament. 
In conclusion, the Scripture speaketh many things as the 
world speaketh, but they may not be worldly understood, 
but ghostly and spiritually, yea, the Spirit of God only un- 



I 



i 



m 




Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



125 



derstandeth them, and where he is not there is not the un- 
derstanding of the Scripture; but unfruitful disputing and 
brawling about words. 

The Scripture saith, God seeth, God heareth, God smel- 
leth, God walketh, God is with them, God is not with 
them, God is angry, God is pleased, God sendeth his Spirit, 
God taketh his Spirit away, and a thousand such like: and 
yet is none of them true after the worldly manner, and as the 
words sound. Read the iind chapter of Paul to the Cor- 
rinthians: The natural man understandeth not the things 
of God, but the Spirit of God only. And we, saith he, have 
received the Spirit which is of God to understand the things 
which are given us of God: or without the Spirit it is im- 
possible to understand them. Read also the viiith to the 
Romans: They that are led with the Spirit of God, are 
the sons of God: now the son knoweth his father's will 
and the servant that hath not the Spirit of Christ, (saith 
Paul) is none of his: likewise he that hath not the Spirit 
of God, is none of God's, for it is both one Spirit, as thou 
mayest see in the same place. 

Now he that is of God heareth the word of God, (John 
viii.) And who is of God but he that hath the Spirit of God? 
furthermore, saith he, Ye hear it not, because ye are not 
of God; that is, ye have no lust in the word of God, for ye 
understand it not, and that because his Spirit is not in you. 

Forasmuch then as the Scripture is nothing else but that 
which the Spirit of God hath spoken by the prophets and 
apostles, and cannot be understood but of the same Spirit, 
Let every man pray to God to send him his Spirit to loose 
him from his natural blindness and ignorance, and to give 
him understanding, and feeling of the things of God, and of 
the speaking of the Spirit of God. And mark this process: 
first, we are damned of nature, so conceived and born, as 
a serpent is a serpent, and a toad a toad, and a snake a 
snake by nature. And as thou seest a young child which 
hath pleasure in many things wherein is present death, as in 
fire, water, and so forth, would slay himself with a thousand 



The sayings 
of the 
Scnptures 
miiy not be 
grossly un-
d«r?toood. 



The nntural 
m«[i undi*r- 
gtatideth 
tiot the 
thtfkgs of 
Gud. 

Rom. vUL 



John Tul. 



The Scrip- 
ture IB no- 
thing else 
but tUnt 
which th« 
Spirit of 
God hnlh 
ftpoken. 




Bv failU m 
ChrUt we 
tm brougbt 
to the state
of >i]lU 



God work- 
tih bU own 
will with all 
hia crcM 



If we be- 
lieve] a God 
we must 
put off the 
old mmi Kud 
faia wnrk9. 


deaths if he were not waited upon and kept therefrom,
even so we, if we should live these thousand years, could in
all that time delight in no other thing, nor yet seek any
other thing but that wherein is death of the soul. 

Secondarily, of the whole multitude of the nature of man, 
whom God hath elect and chosen, and to whom he hath 
appointed mercy and grace in Christ, to them sendeth he his 
Spirit, which openeth their eyes, sheweth them their misery, 
and bringeth them unto the knowledge of themselves, so 
that they hate and abhor themselves, are astonished and 
amazed, and at their wit's end, neither wot what to do, or 
where to seek health. Then lest they should flee from God 
by desperation, he comforteth them again with his sweet 
promises in Christ, and certifieth their hearts that for Christ's 
sake they are received to mercy, and their sins forgiven, 
and they elect and made the sons of God, and heirs with 
Christ of eternal life: and thus, through faith, are they set 
at peace with God. 

Now may not we ask why God chooseth one and not 
another; either think that God is unjust to damn us afore 
we do any actual deed; seeing that God hath power overall 
his creatures of right to do with them what he list, or to 
make of every one of them as be listeth. Our darkness 
cannot perceive his light. God will be feared, and not have 
his secret judgments known. Moreover we by the light of 
faith see a thousand things which are impossible to an in- 
fidel to see: so likewise no doubt, in the light of the clear 
vision of God, we shall see things which now God will not 
have known. For pride ever accompanieth high knowledge, 
but grace accompanieth meekness. Let us therefore give 
diligence rather to do the will of God, than to search his 
secrets which are not profitable for us to know. 

When we are thus reconciled to God, made the friends 
of God and heirs of eternal life, the Spirit that God hath 
poured into us testifieth that we may not live after our old 
deeds of ignorance: for how is it possible that we should 
repent and abhor them, and yet have lust to live in them? 



I 
I 





Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



127 



We are sure therefore that God hath created and made us 
new in Christ and put his Spirit in us that we should live 
a new life which is the life of good works. 

That thou mayest know what are good works, and the 
intent of good works, or wherefore good works serve, mark 
this that followeth. 

The life of a Christian man is inward between him and 
God, and properly is the consent of the Spirit to the will 
of God and to the honour of God. And God's honour is the 
final end of all good works. 

Good works are all things that are done within the laws 
of God, in which God is honoured, and for which thanks 
are given to God. 

Fasting is to abstain from surfeiting, or overmuch eating, 
from drunkenness, and care of the world (as thou mayest 
read Luke xxi.) and the end of fasting is to tame the body 
that the Spirit may have a free course to God, and may 
quietly talk with God. For overmuch eating and drinking, 
and care of worldly business, press down the spirit, choke 
her and tangle her that she cannot lift up herself to God. 
Now he that fasteth for any other intent than to subdue 
the body that the Spirit may wait on God, and freely ex- 
cercise herself in the things of God; the same is blind, 
and wotteth not what he doth, erreth and shooteth at a 
wrong mark, and his intent and imagination is abominable 
in the sight of God. When thou fastest from meat and 
drinkest all day, is that a Christian fast? either to eat at 
one meal that were sufficient for four? A man at four 
times may bear that he cannot at once. Some fast from 
meat and drink, and yet so tangle themselves in worldly 
business that they cannot once think on God. Some 
abstain from butter, some from eggs, some from all manner 
[of] white meat, some this day, some that day, some in the 
honour of this saint, some of that, and every man for a 
sundry purpose. Some for the tooth ache, some for the 
head ache, for fevers, pestilence, for sudden death, for 
hanging, drowning, and to be delivered from the pains of 



GoimI 

wurki what 

nod to wliat 
end they 
Berrep 



tito true fi5« 
£ he n.'of< 



True fast- 
ing whut It 
is. 

Stip«rstiti- 
oui faatiiif. 



128 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Supeintki-'' 



True 



Priyer, 

what it ii. 



hell. Some are so mad, that they fast one of the Thursdays 
between the two St. Mary days, in the worship of that 
saint, whose day is hallowed between Christmas and Can- 
dlemas; and that to be delivered from the pestilence. All 
those men fast without conscience of God, and without 
knowledge of the true intent of fasting, and do no other 
than honour saints, as the Gentiles and heathen worshipped 
their idols, and are drowned in blindness, and know not 
of the Testament, that God hath made to man ward in 
Christ's bloods In God have they neither hope nor con- 
fidence, neither believe his promises, neither know his will, 
but are yet in captivity under the prince of darkness. 

Watch, is not only to abstain from sleep, but also to 
be circumspect and to cast all perils; as a man should 
watch a tower or a castle. We must remember that the 
snares of the devil are infinite and innumerable, and that 
every moment arise new temptations, and that in all places 
meet us fresh occasions; against which we must prepare 
ourselves and turn to God and complain to him, and make 
our moan, and desire him of his mercy to be our shield, 
our tower, our castle, and defence from all evil, to put his 
strength in us, for without him we can do nought, and 
above all things we must call to mind what promises God 
hath made and what he hath sworn that he will do to us 
for Christ's sake, and with strong faith cleave unto him and 
desire him of his mercy and for the love that he hath to 
Christ, and for his truth's sake, to fulfil his promises. If 
we thus cleave to God with strong faith and believe his 
words, then as saith Paul, (ist Cor. x.) God is faithful that 
he will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, 
or above our might, that is to say, if we cleave to his pro- 
mises and not to our own fantasies and imaginations, he 
will put might and power into us that shall be stronger than 
all the temptation which he shall suffer to be against us. 

Prayer is a mourning, a longing, and a desire of the



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



129 



man mourneth and sorroweth in his heart, longing for 
health. Faith ever prayeth. For after that by faith we 
are reconciled to God, and have received mercy and for- 
giveness of God, the spirit longeth and thirsteth for 
strength to do the will of God, and that God may be 
honoured, his name hallowed, and his pleasure and will 
fulfilled. The spirit waiteth and watcheth on the will of 
God, and ever hath her own fragility and weakness before 
her eyes; and when she seeth temptation and peril draw 
nigh, she turneth to God, and to the Testament that God 
hath made to all that believe and trust in Christ's blood, 
and desireth God for his mercy, and truth, and for the love he 
hath to Christ, that he will fulfil his promise, that he will 
succour, and help, and give us strength, and that he will sanc- 
tify his name in us, and fulfil his godly will in us, and that 
he will not look on our sin and iniquity, but on his mercy, 
on his truth, and on the love that he oweth to his Son 
Christ, and for his sake to keep us from temptation, that 
we be not overcome, and that he deliver us from evil, and 
whatsoever moveth us contrary to his godly will. 

Moreover, of his own experience he feeleth other men's
need, and no less commendeth to God the infirmities of 
other than his own, knowing that there is no strength, no 
help, no succour, but of God only. And as merciful as 
he feeleth God in his heart to himselfward, so merciful is 
he to other; and as greatly as he feeleth his own misery, 
so great compassion hath he on other. His neighbour is 
no less care to him than himself: he feeleth his neighbour's 
grief no less than his own. And whensoever he seeth oc- 
casion, he cannot but pray for his neighbour as well as 
for himself: his nature is to seek the honour of God in 
all men, and to draw (as much as in him is) all men unto 
God. This is the law of love, which springeth out of 
Christ's blood into the hearts of all them that have their 
trust in him. No man needeth to bid a Christian man to pray, 
if he see his neighbour's need: if he see it not, put him in 
remembrance only, and then he cannot but do his duty. 

VOL. II. K 



130 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Trne pmyer 
is not 
wUfaoitt 
fnith and 
qliarityi 



M«tt* r. 



He that rt- 
peoteih hia 
■in is no 
nxomr be- 
fore God. 



How we 

nhould prny 
for our 
neighbours. 



Now, as touching we desire one another to pray for us, 
that do we to put our neighbour in remembrance of his 
duty, and not that we trust in his holiness. Our trust is 
in God, in Christ, and in the truth of God's promises; 
we have also a promise, that when two or three, or more, 
agree together in any thing, according to the will of God, 
God heareth us. Notwithstanding, as God heareth many, 
so heareth he few, and so heareth he one, if he pray after 
the will of God, and desire the honour of God. He that 
desireth mercy, the same feeleth his own misery and sin, 
and mourneth in his heart for to be delivered, that he 
might honour God; and God for his truth must hear him, 
which saith by the mouth of Christ, (Matt. v.) Blessed are 
they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they 
shall be filled. God, for his truth's sake, must put the 
righteousness of Christ in him, and wash his unrighteous- 
ness away in the blood of Christ. And be the sinner never 
so weak, never so feeble and frail, sin he never so oft and 
so grievous, yet so long as this lust, desire, and mourning 
to he delivered remaineth in him, God seeth not his sins, 
reckoneth them not, for his truth's sake, and love to 
Christ. He is not a sinner in the sight of God that would 
be no sinner. He that would be delivered hath his heart 
loose already. His heart sinneth not, but mourneth, re- 
penteth, and consenteth unto the law and will of God, and 
justifieth God; that is, beareth record that God which 
made the law is righteous and just. And such an heart, 
trusting in Christ's blood, is accepted for full righteous. 
And his weakness, infirmity, and frailty is pardoned, and 
his sins not looked upon: until God put more strength in 
him, and fulfil his lust. 

When the weak in the faith, and unexpert in the mys- 
teries of Christ, desire us to pray for them, then ought we 
to lead them to the truth and promises of God, and teach 
them to put their trust in the promises of God, in love 
that God hath to Christ and to us for his sake, and to 
strengthen their weak consciences, shewing and proving by 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



131 



the Scripture, that as long as they follow the Spirit and 
resist sin, it is impossible they should fall so deep that 
God shall not pull them up again, if they hold fast by the 
anchor of faith, having trust and confidence in Christ. 
The love that God hath to Christ is infinite; and Christ 
did and suffered all things not for himself, to obtain favour 
or aught else; for he had ever the full favour of God, and 
was ever Lord over all things; but to reconcile us to God, 
and to make us heirs with him of his Father's kingdom. 
And God hath promised, that whosoever calleth on his 
name shall never be confounded or ashamed. (Rom. ix.) 
If the righteous fall (saith the Scripture) he shall not be 
bruised; the Lord shall put his hand under him. Who is 
righteous but he that trusteth in Christ's blood, be he 
never so weak? Christ is our righteousness; and in him 
ought we to teach all men to trust, and to expound unto 
all men the Testament, that God hath made to us sinners 
in Christ's blood. This ought we to do, and not make a 
prey of them to lead them captive, to sit in their consciences, 
and to teach them to trust in our holiness, good deeds and 
prayers, to the intent that we would feed our idle and slow 
bellies of their great labour and sweat, and so to make 
ourselves Christs and Saviours. For if I take on me to 
save other by my merits, make I not myself a Christ 
and a Saviour, and am indeed a false prophet, and a true 
Antichrist, and exalt myself and sit in the temple of God; 
that is to wit, the consciences of men? 

Among Christian men, love maketh all things common; 
every man is other's debtor, and every man is bound 
to minister to his neighbour, and to supply his neigh- 
bour's lack of that wherewith God hath endowed 
him. As thou seest in the world, how the lords and 
officers minister peace in the commonwealth, punish 
murderers, thieves, and evil doers, and to maintain their 
order and estate, do the commons minister to them again 
rent, tribute, toll, and custom: so in the gospel, the curates 
which in every parish preach the gospel, ought of duty to 



Ri»in. 



Cbrist iH 

our rightc^ 



Among 
Chmtimi 
men mak- 
eth aU 
tbingg 
common. 



tai 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



rnnnot 
Sitter t be 
Ijiwof God^ 

makt It 
more or 



it 19. 



1 Pel. i. 

1 Jotin t. 



receive an honest living for them and their households; and 
even so ought the other officers, which are necessarily re- 
quired in the commonwealth of Christ. We need not to 
use filthy lucre in the gospel, to chop and change, and to 
play the taverners, altering the word of God as they do 
their wines, to their most advantage, and to fashion God's 
word after every man's mouth; or to abuse the name of 
Christ, to obtain thereby authority and power to feed our 
slow bellies. Now seest thou what prayer is, the end 
thereof, and wherefore it serveth. 

If thou give me a thousand pounds to pray for thee, I 
am no more bound than I was before. Man's imagination 
can make the commandment of God neither greater nor 
smaller, neither can to the law of God either add or 
minish. God's commandment is as great as himself. I am 
bound to love the Turk with all my might and power; yea, 
and above my power, even from the ground of my heart, after 
the ensample that Christ loved me, -— neither to spare goods, 
body, or life, to win him to Christ. And what can I do 
more for thee if thou gavest me all the world? Where I see 
need there can I not but pray, if God's Spirit be in me. 

Alms is a Greek word, and signifieth mercy. One 
Christian is debtor to another at his need, of all that he is 
able to do for him, until his need be sufficed. Every 
Christian man ought to have Christ always before his eyes, 
as an ensample to counterfeit and follow, and to do to his 
neighbour as Christ hath done to him, as Paul teacheth in 
all his epistles, and Peter in his first, and John in his first 
also. This order useth Paul in all his epistles: first, he 
preacheth the law, and proveth that the whole nature of 
man is damned, in that the heart lusteth contrary to the 
will of God. For if we were of God, no doubt we 
should have lust in his will. Then preacheth he Christ, 
the gospel, the promises, and the mercy that God hath set 
forth to all men in Christ's blood: which they that believe, 
and take it for an earnest thing, turn themselves to God, 
begin to love God again, and to prepare themselves to his 



1 

n 




Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



133 



will by the working of the Spirit of God in them. Last of all, 
exhorteth he to unity, peace, and soberness; to avoid brawl- 
ings, sects, opinions, disputing and arguing about words, 
and to walk in the plain and single faith and feeling of the 
Spirit, and to Love one another after the ensample of 
Christ, even as Christ loved us; and to be thankful, and 
to walk worthy of the gospel, and as it becometh Christ, 
and with the ensample of pure living to draw all to Christ. 

Christ is lord over all; and every Christian is heir an- 
nexed with Christ, and therefore Lord of all; and every 
one Lord of whatsoever another hath. If thy brother or 
neighbour therefore need, and thou have to help him, 
and yet shewest not mercy, but withdrawest thy hands 
from him, then robbest thou him of his own, and art a 
thief. A Christian man hath Christ's spirit. Now is Christ 
a merciful thing: if, therefore, thou be not merciful, after 
the ensample of Christ, then hast thou not his Spirit. If 
thou have not Christ's Spirit, then art thou none of his, 
(Rom. viii.) nor hast any part with him. Moreover, 
though thou shew mercy unto thy neighbour, yet if thou do 
it not with such burning love as Christ did unto thee, so 
must thou knowledge thy sin, and desire mercy in Christ. 
A Christian man hath nought to rejoice in, as concerning his 
deeds. His rejoicing is that Christ died for him, and that 
he is washed in Christ's blood. Of his deeds rejoiceth he 
not, neither counteth his merits, neither giveth pardons of 
them, neither seeketh an higher place in heaven of them, 
neither maketh himself a saviour of other men through his 
good works: but giveth all honour to God, and in his 
greatest deeds of mercy, knowledgeth himself a sinner un- 
feignedly, and is abundantly content with that place that is 
prepared for him of Christ; and his good deeds are to him 
a sign only that Christ's Spirit is in him, and he in Christ, 
and, through Christ, elect to eternal life. 

The order of love or charity which some dream, the
gospel of Christ knoweth not of, that a man should begin
at himself, and serve himself first, and then descend, I wot 



He timt 1« 

liHtti the 
Spirit of 

Rimi* rnL 



134 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



1 Cor Jilii* 



Cbn«t U »11 
in nil 



Efcry one 
iniut cure 
for tUeir 
own botisc- 



Id tblne 
own Louse- 
bold » JUjLtj 
tben^to 
ih« poor* 



not by what steps. Love seeketh not her own profit, (1 Cor. 
xiii.) but maketh a man to forget himself, and to turn his 
profit to another man, as Christ sought not himself, or his 
own profit, but ours. This term, myself, is not in the 
gospel; neither yet father, mother, sister, brother, kins- 
man, that one should be preferred in love above another. 
But Christ is all in all things. Every Christian man to 
another is Christ himself; and thy neighbour's need hath 
as good right in thy goods as hath Christ himself, which is 
heir and Lord over all. And look, what thou owest to 
Christ, that thou owest to thy neighbour's need: to thy 
neighbour owest thou thine heart, thyself, and all that thou 
hast and canst do. The love that springeth out of Christ 
excludeth no man, neither putteth difference between one 
and another. In Christ we are all of one degree, without 
respect of persons. Notwithstanding, though a Christian 
man's heart be open to all men, and receiveth all men, yet, 
because that his ability of goods extendeth not so far, this 
provision is made, — that every man shall care for his own 
household, as father and mother, and thine elders that have 
holpen thee, wife, children, and servants. If thou shouldest 
not care and provide for thine household, then were thou 
an infidel, seeing thou hast taken on thee so to do, 
and forasmuch as that is thy part committed to thee of the 
congregation. When thou hast done thy duty to thine 
household, and yet hast further abundance of the blessing 
of God, that owest thou to the poor that cannot labour, 
or would labour and can get no work, and are destitute of 
friends; to the poor, I mean, which thou knowest, to them 
of thine own parish. For that provision ought to be had 
in the congregation, that every parish care for their poor. 
If thy neighbours which thou knowest be served, and thou 
yet have superfluity, and hearest necessity to be among the 
brethren a thousand miles of, to them art thou debtor. 
Yea, to the very infidels we be debtors, if they need, as 
far forth as we maintain them not against Christ, or to 
blaspheme Christ. Thus is every man that needeth thy 





Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



135 



help, thy father, mother, sister and brother in Chist; even 
as every man that doth the will of the father, is father, 
mother, sister and brother unto Christ. 

Moreover if any be an infidel and a false christian, and 
forsake his household, his wife, children, and such as can- 
not help themselves, then art thou bound and thou have 
wherewith even as much as to thine own household. And 
they have as good right in thy goods as thou thyself: 
and if thou withdraw mercy from them, and hast wherewith 
to help them, then art thou a thief. If thou shew mercy, 
so doest thou thy duty, and art a faithful minister in the 
household of Christ, and of Christ shalt thou have thy re- 
ward and thanks. If the whole world were thine, yet hath 
every brother his right in thy goods, and is heir with thee, 
as we are all heirs with Christ. Moreover the rich and they 
that have wisdom with them must see the poor set a work, 
that as many as are able may feed themselves with the la- 
bour of their own hands, according to the Scripture and 
commandment of God. 

Now seest thou what alms-deeds meaneth, and wherefore 
it serveth. He that seeketh with his alms more than to be mer- 
ciful to a neighbour, to succour his brother's need, to do his 
duty to his brother, to give his brother that he oweth him, 
the same is blind and seeth not what it is to be a christian 
man, and to have fellowship in Christ's blood. 

As pertaining to good works, understand that all works 
are good which are done within the law of God, in faith 
and with thanksgiving to God, and understand that thou in 
doing them pleasest God, whatsoever thou doest within the 
law of God, as when thou makest water. And trust me, if 
either wind or water were stopped, thou shouldest feel what 
a precious thing it were to do either of both, and what 
thanks ought to be given God therefore. Moreover put 
no difference between works, but whatsoever cometh into 
thy hands that do, as time, place, and occasion giveth, and 
as God hath put thee in degree high or low. For as 
touching to please God, there is no work better than 



Wc mint 
for Ctiriat*a 
sjikff sltew 
oiir com- 
fiasiion >tnc1 
chiirity %o 
B.U men, lo 
far fta our 
abtUty will 



GoDil 
they *re. 



136 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Car. \%^ 



r 



Wb inmt 
do good 
^urka antl 
yet put n J 
trttfti m 
tLcm. 



another. God looketh not first on thy work as the world 
doth, as though the beautifutness of the work pleased him 
as it doth the world, or as though he had need of them: 
but God looketh first on thy heart, what faith thou hast to 
his words, how thou believest him, trustest him, and how 
thou lovest him for his mercy that he hath showed thee; he 
looketh with what heart thou workest, and not what thou 
workest, how thou acceptest the degree that he hath put 
thee in, and not of what degree thou art, whether thou be an 
apostle or a shoemaker. Set this ensample before thine eyes. 
Thou art a kitchen page, and washest thy master's dishes, 
another is an apostle, and preacheth the word of God. Of 
this apostle hark what Paul saith in the iind Cor. ix. If 
I preach, saith he, I have nought to rejoice in, for necessity 
is put unto me; as who should say, God hath made me so. 
Woe is unto me if I preach not. If I do it willingly, saith 
he, then have I my reward, that is, then am I sure that 
God's Spirit is in me and that I am elect to eternal life. 
If I do it against my will, an office is committed unto me; 
that is, if I do it not of love to God, but to get a living 
thereby, and for a worldly purpose, and had rather other- 
wise live, then do I that office which God hath put me in, 
and yet please not God myself. Note now, if this apostle 
preach not, as many do not, which not only make them- 
selves apostles, but also compel men to take them for greater 
than apostles, yea, for greater than Christ himself: then 
woe is unto him, that is, his damnation is just. If he preach 
and his heart not right, yet ministereth he the office that God 
hath put him in, and they that have the Spirit of God, hear 
the voice of God, yea, though he speak in an ass. More- 
over howsoever he preacheth he hath not to rejoice in that 
he preacheth. But and if he preach willingly, with a true 
heart, and of concience to God, then hath he his reward, 
that is, then feeleth he the earnest of eternal life, and the 
working of the Spirit of God in him. And as he feeleth 
God's goodness and mercy, so be thou sure he feeleth his 
own infirmity, weakness, and unworthiness, and mourneth 




Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



137 



and knowledgeth his sin, in that the heart will not arise to 
work with that full lust and love that is in Christ our 
Lord: And nevertheless is yet at peace with God, through 
faith and trust in Christ Jesu. For the earnest of the Spi- 
rit that worketh in him, testifieth and beareth witness unto 
his heart that God hath chosen him, and that his grace shall 
suffice him, which grace is now not idle in him. In his 
works putteth he his trust. 

Now thou that ministerest in the kitchen, and art but a 
kitchen page, receivest all things of the hand of God, 
knowest that God hath put thee in that office, submittest thy- 
self to his will and servest thy master not as a man, but as 
Christ himself with a pure heart, according as Paul 
teacheth us, puttest thy trust in God, and with him seekest 
thy reward. Moreover there is not a good deed done, but 
thy heart rejoiceth therein, yea, when thou hearest that the 
word of God is preached by this apostle and seest the 
people turn to God, thou consentest unto the deed; thine 
heart breaketh out in joy, springeth and leapeth in thy breast, 
that God is honoured: and in thine heart doest the same 
that that apostle doth, and haply with greater delectation, 
and a more fervent spirit. Now he that receiveth a prophet 
in the name of a prophet shall receive the reward of a 
prophet; (Matt. x.) that is, he hath consenteth to the deed 
of a prophet, and maintaineth it, the same hath the same 
Spirit and earnest of everlasting life, which the prophet 
hath, and is elect as the prophet is. 

Now if thou compare deed to deed, there is difference 
betwixt washing of dishes, and preaching of the word of 
God; but as touching to please God none at all: for 
neither that nor this pleaseth, but as far forth as God hath 
chosen a man, hath put his Spirit in him, and purified his 
heart by faith and trust in Christ. 

Let every man therefore wait on the office wherein Christ 
hath put him, and therein sene his brethren. If he be of 
low degree let him patiently therein abide, till God pro- 
mote him, and exalt him higher. Let kings and head officers 



God li no 

aceoptcr Qf 
persons, 
but re* 
ceH'ctli aU 
ItiHt fiubmit 



Mntl, I, 



As nU dfrdt 
nre wcci'pt- 
AliktoGtxl 
tUht are 
6 fine in 
fnjth, «o no 
deed is Al- 
lowed (ifood 
in Gad'tf 
Sight (bow 
jfloriouK !o 
the world 
soc*Tr it 
appear§) if 
U be wttb- 
OuL f*Uh. 



138 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Every mia 

Ijo walk 
truly in his 

vocntiont 
it tbe righl 
sitmce of 



We mu*t 
be Tncrciful 
oae to 
mnoihtT* 



Luke Xvil. 



seek Christ in their offices, and minister peace and quiet- 
ness unto the brethren; punish sin, and that with mercy, 
even with the same sorrow and grief of mind as they would 
cut off a finger or joint, a leg or arm, of their own body, 
if there were such disease in them that either they must be 
cut off, or else all the body must perish. 

Let every man of whatsoever craft or occupation he be 
of, whether brewer, baker, tailor, victualler, merchant, or 
husbandman, refer his craft and occupation unto the com- 
monwealth, and serve his brethren as he would do Christ 
himself. Let him buy and sell truly, and not set dice on 
his brethren; and so sheweth he mercy, and his occupation 
pleaseth God. And when thou receivest money for thy la- 
bour or ware thou receivest thy duty. For whereinsoever 
thou minister to thy brethren, thy brethren are debtors to 
give thee wherewith to maintain thyself and household. 
And let your superfluities succour the poor, of which sort 
shall ever be some in all towns, and cities, and villages, and 
that I suppose the greatest number. Remember that we 
are members of one body, and ought to minister one to 
another mercifully: and remember that whatsoever we have 
it is given us of God, to bestow it on our brethren. Let 
him that eateth, eat and give God thanks, only let not thy 
meat pull thine heart from God; and let him that drinketh 
do likewise. Let him that hath a wife, give God thanks for 
his liberty, only let not thy wife withdraw thine heart from 
God, and then pleasest thou God, and hast the word of God 
for thee. And in all things look on the word of God, and 
therein put thy trust, and not in a visor, in a disguised gar- 
ment, and a cut shoe. 

Seek the word of God in all things, and without the 
word of God do nothing, though it appear never so glorious. 
Whatsoever is done without the word of God that count 
idolatry. The kingdom of heaven is within us. (Luke xvii.) 
Wonder therefore at no monstrous shape, nor at any out- 
ward thing without the word: for the world was never drawn 
from God but with an outward shew and glorious appearance 








Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



139 



and shining of hypocrisy, and of feigned and visored fasting, 
praying, watching, singing, offering, sacrificing, hallowing 
of superstitious ceremonies, and monstrous disguising. 

Take this for an ensample: John Baptist which had tes- 
timony of Christ and of the gospel that there never rose a 
greater among womens' children, with his fasting, watching, 
praying, rayment, and strait living, deceived the Jews, 
and brought them in doubt whether John were very Christ 
or not, and yet no Scripture or miracle testifying it, so 
greatly the blind nature of man looketh on the outward 
shining of works and regardeth not the inward word which 
speaketh to the heart. When they sent to John asking him 
whether he were Christ, he denied it. When they asked him 
what he was, and what he said of himself? he answered not, 
I am he that watcheth, prayeth, drinketh no wine nor 
strong drink, eateth neither fish nor flesh, but live with wild 
honey and grasshoppers, and wear a coat of camel's hair and 
a girdle of a skin; but said, I am a voice of a crier. My 
voice only pertaineth to you. Those outward things ye wonder 
at, pertain to myself, only unto the taming of my body. 
To you am I a voice only, and that which I preach. My 
preaching (if it be received into a penitent or repenting heart) 
shall teach you how to live and please God, according as 
God shall shed out his grace on every man. John preached 
repentance, saying, Prepare the Lord's way and make his 
paths straight. The Lord's way is repentance, and not 
hypocrisy of man's imagination, and invention. It is not 
possible that the Lord Christ should come to a man, except 
he know himself and his sin, and truly repent: make his 
paths straight:— the paths are thelaw, if you understand it 
aright as God hath given it. Christ saith in the xviith of 
Matt. Elias shall first come, that is, shall come before 
Christ, and restore all things, meaning of John Baptist. 
John Baptist did restore the law and the Scripture unto the 
right sense and understanding, which the Pharisees partly 
had darkened and made of none effect through their own 
traditions; (Matt. xv.) Where Christ rebuketh them saying 



Hypocrites 
are vain* 
glorious in 
all thffir 
works. 



True 
pri-acben 

must 
prf!Ach re- 



Matt. xvii. 



Matt xr. 




Uu 



Matt, %x\lL 



Thv tniwi- 

ner wad 
doctrm? of 
bypocriteft. 



MtU, ri. 



Matt, x^iii. 



THE PARABLE OF 



Malt xvi. 



[Tyndale. 



Why transgress ye the commandments of God through 
your traditions? and partly had corrupted it with glosses 
and false interpretations, that no man could understand it. 
Wherefore Christ rebuketh them, (Matt. xxiii.) saying, Woe 
be to you pharisees, hypocrites, which shut up the kingdom 
of heaven before men: ye enter not yourselves, neither suffer 
them that come to enter in: and partly did beguile the people 
and blind their eyes in disguising themselves, as thou readest 
in the same xxiiird chapter, how they made broad and large 
phylacteries, and did all their works to be seen of men, that 
the people should wonder at their disguisings and visoring 
themselves otherwise than God hath made them: and partly 
mocked them with hypocrisy of false holiness, in fasting, 
praying, and alms-giving; (Matt. vi.) And this did they for 
lucre, to be in authority, to sit in the consciences of people, 
and to be counted as God himself, that people should trust 
in their holiness, and not in God, as thou readest in the 
place above rehearsed; (Matt. xxiii.) Woe be to you pha- 
risees, hypocrites, which devour widows' houses under a 
colour of a long prayer. Counterfeit therefore nothing with- 
out the word of God, when thou understandest that it shall 
teach thee all things, how to apply outward things and 
whereunto to refer them. Beware of thy good intent, good 
mind, good affection, or zeal, as they call it. Peter of a good 
mind and of a good affection or zeal, chid Christ, (Matt. xvi.) 
because that he said he must go to Jerusalem, and there be 
slain; but Christ called him Satan for his labour, a name 
that belongeth to the devil, and said, That he perceived not 
godly things but worldly. Of a good intent, and of a fervent 
affection to Christ, the sons of Zebedee would have had 
fire to come down from heaven to consume the Samaritans, 
(Luke ix.) but Christ rebuked them, saying that they wist 
not of what Spirit they were: that is, that they understood 
not how that they were altogether worldly and fleshly minded. 
Peter smote Malchus of a good zeal, but Christ con- 
demned his deed. The very Jews of a good intent and of 
a good zeal slew Christ and persecuted the apostles as 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



141 



Paul beareth them record; (Rom. x.) I bear them record 
(saith he) that they have a fervent mind to Godward, but 
not according to knowledge. It is another thing then, to 
do of a good mind, and to do of knowledge. Labour 
for knowledge that thou mayest know God's will, and 
what he would have thee to do. Our mind, intent and 
affection or zeal, are blind, and all that we do of them is 
damned of God, and for that cause hath God made a 
testament between him and us, wherein is contained both 
what he would have us to do, and what he would have us 
to ask of him. See therefore that thou do nothing to 
please God withal but that he commandeth, neither ask 
any thing of him, but that he hath promised thee. The 
Jews also as it appeareth (Acts vii.) slew Stephen of a 
good zeal; because he proved, by the Scripture, that God 
dwelleth not in churches or temples made with hands. 
The churches at the beginning were ordained, that the 
people should thither resort to hear the word of God there 
preached only, and not for the use wherein they now are. 
The temple wherein God will be worshipped, is the heart 
of man. For God is a Spirit (saith Christ, John iv.) and 
will be worshipped in the Spirit and in truth: that is, 
when a penitent heart consenteth unto the law of God, 
and with a strong faith longeth for the promises of God. 
So is God honoured on all sides, in that we count him 
righteous in all his laws and ordinances, and also trust in 
all his promises. Other worshipping of God is there 
none, except we make an idol of him. 



Htjm. X. 



No Eeiil 

WlillOHt 



wUy rhry 
wcre first 
oTfliiiactl. 

The I rue 
tempU *>f 

henrt of 
tunti. 



It shall be recompensed thee, at the rising again of 
the righteous. (Luke xiv.) Read the text before, and 
thou shalt perceive that Christ doth here that same that he 
doth Mat. v. that is, he putteth us in remembrance of our 
duty, that we be to the poor as Christ is to us, and also 
teacheth us, how that we can never know whether our 
love be right, and whether it spring of Christ or no, as long 
as we are but kind to them only which do as much for us 



Luke \v\. 



hUL r. 



142 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



The mAn- 
ner of Ihe 

lf9€B]£ing: of 

the Scrip- 
lure* 



The wiseoF 
lb IB vrorld 
dQ not UD' 
dcrstnnd 
ihe »penk- 
iD^ of God 
itjhiiScrip- 
tureii. 



TJicPaiibts* 



again. But and we be merciful to the poor, for conscience 
to God, and of compassion and hearty love, which com- 
passion and love spring of the love we have to God in 
Christ, for the pure mercy and love that he hath shewed 
on us: then have we a sure token that we are beloved of 
God, and washed in Christ'a blood, and elect by Christ's 
deserving unto eternal life. 

The Scripture speaketh as a father doth to his young 
son, Do this or that, and then will I love thee; yet the 
father loveth his son first, and studieth with all his power 
and wit to overcome his child with love, and with kindness 
to make him do that which is comely, honest, and good for 
itself. A kind father and mother love their children even 
when they are evil, that they would shed their blood to 
make them better, and to bring them into the right way. 
And a natural child studieth not to obtain his father's love 
with works, but considereth with what love his father 
loveth him withal, and therefore loveth again, is glad to do 
his father's will, and studieth to be thankful. 

The spirit of the world understandeth not the speaking 
of God, neither the spirit of the wise of this world, 
neither the spirit of philosophers, neither the spirit of 
Socrates, of Plato, or of Aristotle's Ethics, as thou mayest 
see in the first and second chapter of the first to the Corin- 
thians. Though that many are not ashamed to rail and 
blaspheme, saying, How should he understand the Scripture 
seeing he is no philosopher, neither hath seen his meta- 
physic? Moreover they blaspheme, saying, How can he 
be a divine, and wotteth not what is subjectum in theo- 
logia? Nevertheless as a man, without the spirit of Aris- 
totle or philosophy, may by the Spirit of God understand 
Scripture: even so by the Spirit of God understandeth he 
that God is to be sought in all the Scripture, and in all 
things, and yet wotteth not what meaneth subjectum in 
theologia, because it is a term of their own making. If 
thou shouldest say to him that hath the Spirit of God, the 
love of God is the keeping of the commandments, and to 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



143 



love a man's neighbour is to shew mercy, he would, without 
arguing or disputing, understand, how that of the love of 
God springeth the keeping of his commandments, and of 
the love to thy neighbour springeth mercy. Now would 
Aristotle deny such speaking, and a Dun's man would 
make twenty distinctions. If thou shouldest say, (as saith 
John in the ivth of his Epistle) How can he that loveth 
not his neighbour whom he seeth, love God whom he seeth 
not? Aristotle would say, Lo, a man must first love his 
neighbour and then God, and out of the love to thy neigh- 
bour springeth the love to God. But he that feeleth the 
working of the Spirit of God, and also from what ven- 
geance the blood of Christ hath delivered him, understandeth 
how that it is impossible to love either father or mother, 
sister, brother, neighbour, or his own self aright, except it 
spring out of the love to God, and perceiveth that the love 
to a man's neighbour is a sign of the love to God, as good 
fruit declareth a good tree, and that the love to a man's 
neighbour accompanieth and followeth the love of God, as 
heat accompanieth and followeth fire. 

Likewise when the Scripture saith, Christ shall reward 
every man at the resurrection, or uprising again, according 
to his deeds, the spirit of Aristotle's Ethics would say,
Lo, with the multitude of good works mayest thou, and
must thou, obtain everlasting life. And also a place in 
heaven high or low, according as thou hast many or few 
good works: and yet wotteth not what a good work 
meaneth, as Christ speaketh of good works, as he that 
seeth not the heart, but outward things only. But he 
that hath God's Spirit understandeth it. He feeleth that 
good works are nothing but fruits of love, compassion, 
mercifulness, and of a tenderness of heart which a 
Christian hath to his neighbour, and that love springeth 
of that love which he hath to God, to his will and com- 
mandments, and understandeth also, that the love which 
man hath to God springeth of the infinite love and bot- 
tomless mercy which God in Christ shewed first to us 



Good 

^Ofka are 
tlie rnilLs 

of loFC. 



144 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



r 



God first 
lored usi 
aad not vrc 
iiim. 



How we 

uailerstaad 
tbe love of 
God to be 
in us. 



as saith John in the Epistle and Chapter above rehearsed. 
In this (saith he) appeareth the love of God to usward, 
because that God sent his only begotten Son into the 
world that we might live through him. Herein is love, 
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his 
Son to make agreement for our sins. In conclusion, a 
Christian man feeleth that that unspeakable love and mercy 
which God hath to us, and that Spirit which worketh all 
things that are wrought according to the will of God, 
and that love wherewith we love God, and that love 
which we have to our neighbour, and that mercy and com- 
passion which we shew on him, and also that eternal life 
which is laid up in store for us in Christ, are altogether 
the gift of God, through Christ's purchasing. 

If the Scripture said always, Christ shall reward thee ac- 
cording to thy faith, or according to thy hope and trust thou 
hast in God, or according to the love thou hast to God and thy 
neighbour, so were it true also as thou seest, 1 Pet i. Receiv- 
ing the end or reward of our faith, the health or salvation of 
your souls. But the spiritual things could not be known save 
by their works, as a tree cannot be known but by her 
fruit. How could I know that I loved my neighbour, if 
never occasion were given me to shew mercy unto him? 
how should I know that I loved God, if I never suffered 
for his sake? how should I know that God loved me, if 
there were no infirmity, temptation, peril aud jeopardy 
whence God should deliver me? 



Lwke xviu. 



There is no man that forsaketh house, either father, or 
mother, either brethren or sisters, wife or children for the 
kingdom of heavens' sake, which shall not receive much 
more in this world, and in the world to come everlasting 
life. (Luke xviii.) 

Here seest thou that a Christian man in all his works 
hath respect to nothing, but unto the glory of God only, 
and to the maintaining of the truth of God, and doth, 
and leaveth undone all things of love, to the glory and 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



145 



honour of God only, as Christ teacheth in the Pater- 
noster. 

Moreover when he saith, He shall receive much more 
in this world, of a truth, yea he hath received much more 
already. For except he had felt the infinite mercy, 
goodness, love, and kindness of God, and the fellowship 
of the blood of Christ, and the comfort of the Spirit of 
Christ in his heart, he could never have forsaken any thing 
for God's sake. Notwithstanding (as saith Mark x.) 
Whosoever for Christ's sake and the gospel's, forsaketh 
house, brethren or sisters &c. he shall receive an hun- 
dred fold houses, brethren &c. that is spiritually. For 
Christ shall be all things unto thee. The angels, all 
Christians, and whosoever doth the will of the father, 
shall be father, mother, sister and brother unto thee, and 
all theirs shall be thine. And God shall take the care of 
thee, and minister all things unto thee, as long as thou 
seekest but his honour only. Moreover if thou wert 
Lord over all the world, yea, of ten worlds, before thou 
knewest God; yet was not thine appetite quenched, thou 
thirstedst for more. But if thou seek his honour only, 
then shall he slake thy thirst, and thou shalt have all that 
thou desirest, and shall be content, yea if thou dwell 
among infidels, and among the most cruel nations of 
the world; yet shall he be a father unto thee, and shall 
defend thee as he did Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all 
saints whose lives thou readest in the Scripture. For all 
that are past and gone before are but ensamples to strengthen 
our faith and trust in the word of God. It is the same 
God, and hath sworn to us all that he sware unto them, 
and is as true as ever he was, and therefore cannot but ful- 
fil his promises to us, as well as he did to them, if we 
believe as they did. 

The hour shall come when all they that are in the graves 
shall hear his voice, that is to say, Christ's voice, and shall 
come forth; they that have done good into the resurrection 
of life, and they that have done evil into the resurrection of 

VOL. II. L 



\Vho8Cvcr 
for Christ'i 
sake loscth 
any thing, 
thall re- 
ceive an 
liuodrad 
fold. 



If we once 
possess 

Christ by 
faith, then 
have we all 
in all, and 
are content 
with that 
we have. 



146 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Here note 

loireth of 

good 
works* 



Joka L 



CUHat wc 
Are made 
the soDfl of 
God. 



Jolia ith 



Fdth dotU 
eirpel the 
wratli of 
God. 



p 



damnation. (John v.) This, and all like texts, declare 
what followeth good works, and that our deeds shall testify 
with us, or against us at that day; and putteth us in re- 
membrance to be diligent, and fervent in doing good. 
Hereby mayest thou not understand that we obtain the 
favour of God, and the inheritance of life, through the 
merits of good works, as hirelings do their wages. For 
then shouldest thou rob Christ, of whose fulness we have 
received favour for favour; (John i.) that is, God's favour 
was so full in Christ, that for his sake he giveth us his 
favour, as affirmeth also Paul, (Eph. i.) He loved us in 
his beloved, by whom we have (saith Paul) redemption 
through his blood, and forgiveness of sins. The forgive- 
ness of sins, then, is our redemption in Christ, and not 
the reward of works. In whom (saith he in the same 
place) he chose us before the making of the world, that is 
long before we did good works. Through faith in Christ 
are we also the sons of God, as thou readest (John i.) In 
that they believed on his name, he gave them power to 
be the sons of God. God, with all his fulness aud 
riches, dwelleth in Christ, and out of Christ must we 
fetch all things. Thou readest also (John iii.) He that be- 
lieveth on the Son hath eternal life: and he that believeth 
not shall see no life, but the wrath of God abideth upon 
him. Here seest thou that the wrath and vengeance of 
God possesseth every man till faith come. Faith and 
trust in Christ expelleth the wrath of God, and bringeth 
favour, the Spirit, power to do good, and everlasting life. 
Moreover, until Christ hath given thee light, thou knowest 
not wherein standeth the goodness of thy works; and 
until his Spirit hath loosed thine heart, thou canst not 
consent unto good works. All that is good in us, both 
will and works, cometh of the favour of God, through 
Christ, to whom be all the laud. Amen. 

If any man will do his will (he meaneth the will of the 
Father,) he shall know of the doctrine whether it he of 




Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



147 



God, or whether I speak of myself. (John vii.) This 
text meaneth not that any man of his own strength, power, 
and free will, (as they call it,) can do the will of God 
before he hath received the Spirit and strength of 
Christ, through faith. But here is meant that which is 
spoken in the iiird of John, when Nicodemus marvelled 
how it were possible that a man should be born again: 
Christ answered, That which is born of the flesh is flesh, 
and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit; as who 
should say, He that hath the Spirit through faith, and is 
born again, and made anew in Christ, understandeth the 
things of the Spirit, and what he that is spiritual meaneth. 
But he that is flesh, and as Paul saith, (1 Cor. ii.) a natu- 
ral man, and led of his blind reason only, can never 
ascend to the capacity of the Spirit. And he giveth an 
ensample, saying, The wind bloweth where it listeth, and 
thou hearest his voice, and wottest not whence he cometh, 
nor whither he will: so is every man that is born of the 
Spirit: he that speaketh of the Spirit can never be un- 
derstood of the natural man, which is but flesh, and 
savoureth no more than things of the flesh. So here 
meaneth Christ, If any man have the Spirit, and con- 
senteth unto the will of God, this same at once wotteth 
what I mean. 



JoliD Tli. 



1 Cor ii. 



The nut II- 
ral mnn, 
wblch Li 
but Hc&U, 

not tLid<v 
tilings timt 
are of the 
Spirit. 



If ye understand these things, happy are ye if ye do 
them. (John xiii.) A Christian man's heart is with the
will of God, with the law and commandments of God, 
and hungereth and thirsteth after strength to fulfil them, 
and mourneth day and night, desiring God, according to 
his promises, for to give him power to fulfil the will of 
God with love and lust: then testifieth his deed that he is 
blessed, and that the Spirit which blesseth us in Christ is 
in him, and ministereth such strength. The outward deed 
testifieth what is within us, as thou readest, (John v.) The
deeds which I do testify of me, saith Christ. And 
(John xiii.) Hereby shall all men know that ye are my 

L2 



ue 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Wcarc 
blessed by 
God only in 
ChriAt our 
Saviour, 
and not by 
our works. 



disciples, if ye love one another. And (John xiv.) He that 
hath my commandments, and keepeth them, the same it 
is that loveth me. And again: He that loveth me keepeth 
my commandments; and he that loveth me not keepeth 
not my commandments: the outward deed testifieth of 
the inward heart. And (John xv.) If ye shall keep my 
commandments ye shall continue in my love, as I keep 
my Father's commandment, and continue in his love. 
That is, As ye see the love that I have to my Father, in 
that I keep his commandments, so shall ye see the love 
that ye have to me, in that ye keep my commandments. 

Thou mayest not think that our deeds bless us first, and 
that we prevent God and his grace in Christ, as though 
we, in our natural gifts, and being as we were born in 
Adam, looked on the law of God, and of our own strength 
fulfilled it, and so became righteous, and then, with that 
righteousness, obtained the favour of God. As philo- 
sophers write of righteousness, and as the righteousness of 
temporal law is, where the law is satisfied vnth the hypo- 
crisy of the outward deed. For contrary to that readest 
thou (John xv.) Ye have not chosen me (saith Christ,) but 
I have chosen you, that ye go and bring forth fruit, and 
that your fruit remain. And in the same chapter: I am 
a vine, and ye the branches; and without me can ye do 
nothing. With us, therefore, so goeth it. In Adam are 
we all, as it were, wild crab-trees, of which God chooseth 
whom he will, and plucketh them out of Adam, and 
planteth them in the garden of his mercy, and stocketh 
them, and grafteth the Spirit of Christ in them, which 
bringeth forth the fruit of the will of God; which fruit 
testifieth that God hath blessed us in Christ. Note this 
also; that as long as we live we are yet partly carnal and 
fleshly, (notwithstanding that we are in Christ, and though 
it be not imputed unto us for Christ's sake,) for there abideth 
and remaineth in us yet of the old Adam, as it were of the 
stock of the crab-tree; and ever among, when occasion is 
given him, shooteth forth his branches and leaves, bud, 



Tyndale.] THE WICKED MAMMON. 149 

blossom, and fruit: against whom we must fight and subdue
him, and change all his nature by a little and a little, with
prayer, fasting, and watching; with virtuous meditation and
holy works, until we be altogether spirit. The kingdom of
heaven, saith Christ, (Matt. xiii.) is like leaven, which a
woman taketh and hideth in three pecks of meal till all 
be leavened. The leaven is the Spirit, and we the meal, 
which must be seasoned with the Spirit a little and a lit- 
tle, till we be throughout spiritual. 

Which shall reward every man according to his deed; 
(Rom. ii.) That is, according as the deeds are so shall every
man's reward be: the deeds declare what we are, as the 
fruit the tree; according to the fruit shall the tree be 
praised. The reward is given of the mercy and truth of 
God, and by the deserving and merits of Christ. Whoso- 
ever repenteth, believeth the gospel, and putteth his trust 
in Christ's merits, the same is heir with Christ of eternal 
life; for assurance whereof, the Spirit of God is poured 
into his heart as an earnest, which looseth him from the 
bonds of Satan, and giveth him lust and strength every 
day more and more, according as he is diligent to ask of 
God for Christ's sake: and eternal life followeth good 
living. I suppose, (saith St. Paul in the same epistle, the 
viiith chapter,) that the afflictions of this world are not
worthy of the glory which shall be shewed on us; that is 
to say, that which we here suffer can never deserve that 
reward which there shall be given us. 

Moreover, if the reward should depend and hang of the 
works, no man should be saved: forasmuch as our best
deeds, compared to the law, are damnable sin. By the
deeds of the law is no flesh justified, as it is written in the
third chapter to the Romans. The law justifieth not, but
uttereth the sin only, and compelleth and driveth the
penitent, or repenting sinner, to flee unto the sanctuary of 
mercy in the blood of Christ. Also repent we never so 
much, be we never so well willing unto the law of God, 
yet are we so weak, and the snares and occasions so in- 



150 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



ChrUl is 

Dur hope 
and rignt€- 
on !i acts. 



bat pottiJB 

hope in 
Clirist flad 
lie «hall tic 



numerable, that we fall daily and hourly: so that we could 
not but despair if the reward banged of the work. Who- 
soever ascribeth eternal life unto the deserving and merit 
of works, must fall in one of two inconveniences; either 
must he be a blind Pharisee, not seeing that the law 
is spiritual and he carnal, and look and rejoice in the out- 
ward shining of his deeds, despising the weak, and, in 
respect of them, justify himself; or else (if he see how 
that the law is spiritual, and he never able to ascend unto 
that which the law requireth,) he must needs despair. 
Let every Christian man, therefore, rejoice in Christ our 
hope, trust, and righteousness, in whom we are loved, 
chosen, and accepted unto the inheritance of eternal life; 
neither presuming in our perfectness, neither despairing 
in our weakness. The perfecter a man is the clearer is 
his sight, and seeth a thousand things which displease 
him, and also perfectness that cannot be obtained in this 
life; and therefore desireth to be with Christ, where 
is no more sin. Let him that is weak and cannot do that 
he would fain do, not despair, but turn to Him that is 
strong, and hath promised to give strength to all that ask 
of him in Christ's name; and complain to God, and desire 
him to fulfil his promises, and to God commit himself; 
and he shall of his mercy and truth strengthen him, and 
make him feel with what love he is beloved for Christ's 
sake, though he be never so weak. 



Let no man is no more sm. 



Rom. 11. 



I 

4 



They are not righteous before God which hear the
law; but they which do the law shall be justified. (Rom. ii.)
This test is plainer than that it needeth to be expounded.
In the chapter before, Paul proveth that the law natural holp 
not the Gentiles, (as appeareth by the law, statutes, and 
ordinances which they made in their cities,) yet kept they 
them not. The great keep the small under, for their own
profit, with the violence of the law. Every man praiseth
the law as far forth as it is profitable and pleasant unto 
himself. But when his own appetites should be re- 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



151 



frained, then grudgeth he against the law. Moreover, he 
proveth that no knowledge holp the Gentiles. For though 
the learned men (as the philosophers,) came to the know- 
ledge of God by the creatures of the world, yet had they 
no power to worship God. In this second chapter proveth 
he that the Jews, (though they had the law written,) yet it 
holp them not: they could not keep it, but were idolaters, 
and were also murderers, adulterers, and whatsoever the 
law forbad. He concludeth, therefore, that the Jew is as 
well damned as the Gentile. If hearing of the law only 
might have justified, then had the Jews been righteous. 
But it requireth that a man do the law if he will be 
righteous; which, because the Jew did not, he is no less 
damned than the Gentile. The publishing and declaring 
of the law doth but utter a man's sin, and giveth neither 
strength nor help to fulfil the law. The law killeth thy 
conscience, and giveth thee no lust to fulfil the law. Faith 
in Christ giveth lust and power to do the law. Now, is it 
true, that he which doth the law is righteous, but that doth 
no man save he that believeth and putteth his trust in 
Christ. 



No ni,\n 
cjtn fulfil 
the law but 
he ihnt be- 
liGv-iaUi in 
tbriat. 



If any man's work that he hath built upon abide, he 
shall receive a reward. (1 Cor. ii.) The circumstance of 
the same chapter, that is to wit, that which goeth before 
and that which followeth, declareth plainly what is meant. 
Paul talketh of learning, doctrine, or preaching: he saith 
that he himself hath laid the foundation, which is Jesus 
Christ, and that no man can lay any other. He ex- 
horteth, therefore, every man to take heed what he buildeth 
upon; and borroweth a similitude of the goldsmith which 
trieth his metals with fire, saying that the fire, that is, 
the judgment of the Scripture, shall try every man's work, 
that is, every man's preaching and doctrine. If any 
build upon the foundation laid of Paul, I mean Jesus 
Christ, gold, silver, or precious stone, which are all one 
thing, and signify true doctrine, which, when it is exa- 



] Cor» iL 



Ciirial U 
the sure 
foimdatiott. 



152 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Man's 
fonndation 
is feeble. 



mined, the Scripture alloweth; then shall he have his re- 
ward, that is, he shall be sure that his learning is of God, 
and that God's Spirit is in him, and that he shall have the 
reward that Christ hath purchased for him. On the other 
side, if any man build thereon timber, hay, or stubble, 
which are all one, and signify doctrine of man's imagina- 
tion, traditions, and fantasies, which stand not with Christ 
when they are judged and examined by the Scripture, he 
shall suffer damage, but shall be saved himself, yet as it 
were through fire; that is, it shall be painful unto him 
that he hath lost his labour, and to see his building perish; 
notwithstanding, if he repent, and embrace the truth in 
Christ, he shall obtain mercy and be saved. But if Paul 
were now alive, and would defend his own learning, he 
should be tried through fire; not through fire of the 
judgment of Scripture, (for that light men now utterly 
refuse,) but by the Pope's law, and with fire of fagots. 

We must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, 
for to receive every man according to the deeds of his 
body: (2 Cor. v.) As thy deeds testify of thee so shall thy 
reward be. Thy deeds be evil, then is the wrath of God 
upon thee, and thine heart is evil; and so shall thy reward 
be, if thou repent not. Fear, therefore, and cry to God 
for grace, that thou mayest love his laws. And when 
thou lovest them, cease not till thou have obtained power 
of God to fulfil them; so shalt thou be sure that a good 
reward shall follow. Which reward, not thy deeds, but 
Christ's have purchased for thee; whose purchasing also 
is that lust which thou hast to God's law, and that might 
wherewith thou fulfillest them. Remember also, that a 
reward is rather called that which is given freely, than that 
which is deserved. That which is deserved is called (if 
thou wilt give him his right name,) hire or wages. A 
reward is given freely, to provoke unto love and to make 
friends. 

Remember, that whatsoever good thing any man doth, 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



153 



that shall he receive of the Lord: (Eph. vi.) remembering 
that ye shall receive of the Lord the reward of inheritance. 
(Col. iii.) These two texts are exceeding plain. Paul 
meaneth, as Peter doth, (1 Pet. ii.) that servants should 
obey their masters with all their hearts, and with good 
will, though they were never so evil. Yea, he will 
that all who are under power obey, even of heart, and of 
conscience to God, because God will have it so, be the 
rulers never so wicked. The children must obey father 
and mother, be they never so cruel or unkind; likewise 
the wife her husband, the servant his master, the subjects 
and commons their lord or king. Why? For ye serve the 
Lord, saith he in Coloss. iii. We are Christ's, and Christ 
has bought us, as thou readest Rom. xiv. 1 Cor. vi. 
1 Pet. i. Christ is our Lord, and we his possession, and 
his also is the commandment. Now, ought not the cruel- 
ness and churlishness of father and mother, of husband, 
master, lord, or king, cause us to hate the commandment 
of our so kind a Lord Christ; which spared not his blood 
for our sakes; which also hath purchased for us with his 
blood that reward of eternal life, which life shall follow 
the patience of good living, and whereunto our good deeds 
testify that we are chosen. Furthermore, we are so car- 
nal, that if the rulers be good, we cannot know whether 
we keep the commandment for the love that we have to 
Christ, and to God through him, or no. But and if thou 
canst find in thine heart, to do good unto him that rewardeth 
thee evil again, then art thou sure that the same Spirit is 
in thee that is in Christ. And it followeth in the same 
chapter to the Colossians, He that doth wrong shall re- 
ceive for the wrong that he hath done. That is, God 
shall avenge thee abundantly, which seeth what wrong is 
done unto thee, and yet suffereth it for a time, that thou 
mightest feel thy patience and the working of his Spirit in 
thee, and be made perfect. Therefore, see that thou 
not once desire vengeance, but remit all vengeance unto 
God, as Christ did, which saith Peter, (1 Pet. ii.) when 



Eph.vi. 
Colost. ill. 



We must 
obey the 
magis* 
traten, be- 
cause God 
will hare it 

bO. 



Rom.xtr. 
1 Cor. vi, 
1 Pet. i. 



Agbod 
lenon to 
teach us to 
know when 
we hare 
the Spirit 
of God. 



Remit all 
rengeance 
to God. 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



he was reviled, reviled not again, neither threatened when 
he suffered. Unto such obedience, unto such patience, 
unto such a poor heart, and unto such feeling, is Paul's 
meaning to bring all men, and not unto the vain disputing 
of them that ascribe so high a place in heaven unto their 
pilled merits; which, as they feel not the working of 
God's Spirit, so obey they no man. If the king do unto 
them but right, they will interdict the whole realm, curse, 
excommunicate, and send them down far beneath the 
bottom of hell, as they have brought the people out of 
their wits, and made them mad to believe. 

Thy prayers and alms are come up into remembrance 
in the presence of God; (in the Acts x.) that is, God for- 
getteth thee not, though he cometh not at the first calling, 
he looketh on and beholdeth thy prayers and alms. 
Prayer cometh from the heart. God looketh first on the 
heart and then on the deed, as thou readest (Gen. iv.) 
God beheld or looked first on Abel, and then on his of- 
fering. If the heart be unpure the deed verily pleaseth not, 
as thou seest in Cain. Mark the order, in the beginning of 
the chapter thou readest, There was a certain man named 
Cornelius which feared God, gave much alms, and prayed 
God alway. He feared God, that is, he trembled and 
quaked to break the commandments of God. Then prayed 
he alway. Prayer is the fruit, effect, deed or act of faith, and 
is nothing but the longing of the heart for those things which 
a man lacketh, and which God hath promised to give him. 
He doth also alms, alms is the fruit, effect, or deed of com- 
passion and pity which we have to our neighbour. O a glori- 
ous faith and a right which so trusteth God, and believeth 
his promises, that she feareth to break his commandments, 
and is also merciful unto her neighbour! This is that faith 
whereof thou readest, namely m Peter, Paul, and John, that 
we are thereby both justified and saved, and whosoever ima- 
gineth any other faith deceiveth himself and is a vain disputer, 
and a brawler about words, and hath no feeling in his heart. 



Prjiyer is 

the fruit of 
faith. 



P 





Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



155 



Though thou consent to the law, that it is good, 
righteous, and holy, sorrowest and repentest, because thou 
hast broken it, mournest because thou hast no strength to 
fulfil it, yet art not thou thereby at one with God: yea, 
thou shouldest shortly despair and blaspheme God, if the 
promises of forgiveness and of help were not thereby, and 
faith in thine heart to believe them; faith therefore set- 
teth thee at one with God. 

Faith prayeth always. For she hath always her infirmities 
and weaknesses before her eyes, and also God's promises, 
for which she always longeth, and in all places. But blind 
unbelief prayeth not alway, nor in all places, but in the 
church only, and that in such a church where it is not law- 
ful to preach God's promises, neither to teach men to trust 
therein. Faith, when she prayeth, setteth not her good 
deeds before her, saying, Lord, for my good deeds do this 
or that; nor bargaineth with God, saying, Lord, grant me 
this, or do this or that, and I will do this or that for thee; 
as mumble so much daily, go so far, or fast this or that fast, 
enter this religion or that, with such other points of infi- 
delity, yea, rather idolatry; but she setteth her infirmities 
and her lack before her face, and God's promises, saying, 
Lord, for thy mercy and truth which thou hast sworn, be 
merciful unto me, and pluck me out of this prison and out of 
this hell, and loose the bonds of Satan, and give me power 
to glorify thy name: faith therefore justifieth in the heart 
and before God, and the deeds justify outwardly before 
the world, that is, testify only before men, what we are in- 
wardly before God. 

Whosoever looketh in the perfect law of liberty and con- 
tinueth therein, (if he be not a forgetful hearer, but a doer 
of the work) he shall be happy in his deed: (James i.) The 
law of liberty, that is, which required a free heart, or if 
thou fulfil it, declareth a free heart, loosed from the bonds 
of Satan. The preaching of the law maketh no man 
free, but bindeth,for it is the key that bindeth all conciences 
unto eternal damnation, when it is preached; as the pro- 



FjiiiIj rtiAk- 
«tli lu ikt 

one with 

FnilU praj*- 

and in hU 
plac£9« 



The prnyer 
of a faithful 



Jbiuct i* 



156 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



J&mea lit. 



Failh is the 
goodatfts of 
ftll tb^ 
d»(U that 
att dose 
within the 
]aw of God. 



mises or gospel is the key that looseth all consiences that 
repent, when they are bound through preaching of the 
law. He shall be happy in his deed, that is, by his deed shall 
he know that he is happy and blessed of God, which hath 
given him a good heart, and power to fulfil the law; by 
hearing the law thou shall not know that thou art blessed, but 
if thou do it, it declareth that thou art happy and blessed. 

Was not Abraham justified of his deeds when he offered 
his son Isaac upon the altar? (James iii.) His deed justified 
him before the world, that is, it declared and uttered the 
faith which both justified him before God, and wrought that 
wonderful work, as James also affirmeth. 

Was not Rahab the harlot justified when she received the 
messengers, and sent them out another way? (James iii.) 
That is likewise outwardly, but before God she was justified 
by faith which wrought that outward deed, as thou mayest 
see, Josh. ii. She had heard what God had done in 
Egypt, in the red sea, in the desert, and unto the two 
kings of the Amoreans, Silion and Og. And she confessed 
saying, Your Lord God, he is God in heaven above and in 
earth beneath. She also believed that God, as he had 
promised the children of Israel, would give them the land 
wherein she dwelt; and consented thereunto, submitted her- 
self unto the will of God, and holp God, (as much as in her 
was) and saved his spies and messengers. The other feared 
that which she believed, but resisted God with all their 
might, and had no power to submit themselves unto the will 
of God. And therefore perished they, and she was saved 
and that through faith: as we read Heb. xi. where thou 
mayest see how the holy fathers were saved through faith, and 
how faith wrought in them. Faith is the goodness of all the 
deeds that are done within the law of God, and maketh 
them good and glorious, seem they never so vile; and un- 
belief maketh them damnable, seem they never so glorious. 

As pertaining to that which James in this iiird chapter 



t 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



157 



saith, What availeth though a man say that he hath faith 
if he have no deeds? can faith save him? and again, faith 
without deeds is dead in itself; and the devils believe and 
tremble: and as the body without the spirit is dead, even 
so faith without deeds is dead; it is manifest and clear, 
that he meaneth not of the faith whereof Peter and Paul 
speak in their epistles. John in his gospel and first epistle, 
and Christ in the gospel, when he saith, Thy faith hath 
made thee safe, be it to ihee according to thy faith, or 
great is thy faith, and so forth; and of which James him- 
self speaketh in the first chapter, saying, Of his own will 
begat he us with the word of life, that is, in believing the 
the promises wherein is life, are we made the sons of 
God. 

Which thing I also thiswise prove: Paul saith how 
shall or can they believe without a preacher? how should 
they preach except they were sent? Now I pray you when 
was it heard that God sent any man to preach unto the 
devils, or that he made them any good promise? He threat- 
eneth them oft, but never sent any ambassadors to preach 
any atonement between him and them. Take an ensample
that thou mayest understand: let there be two poor men
both destitute of rayment in a cold winter, the one strong 
that he feeleth no grief, the other grievously mourning for 
pain of the cold. I then come by, and, moved with pity and 
compassion, say unto him that feeleth his disease, Come to 
such a place and I will give thee raiment sufficient. He 
believeth, cometh and obtaineth that which I have promised. 
That other seeth all this and knoweth it, but is partaker of 
nought, for he hath no faith, and that is because there is 
no promise made him. So is it of the devils, the devils have 
no faith, for faith is but earnest believing of God's 
promises. Now are there no promises made unto the de- 
vils, but sore threatenings. The old philosophers knew that 
there was one God, but yet had no faith, for they had
no power to seek his will, neither to worship him. The
Turks and the Saracens know that there is one God, but



158 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



An exiim- 



Sini ib^t 
cd no sins. 



yet have no faith, for they have no power to worship God 
in spirit, to seek his pleasure, and to submit them unto his 
will. They made an idol of God, (as we do for the most 
part) and worshipped him every man after his own ima- 
gination, and for a sundry purpose. What we will have 
done, that must God do, and to do our will worship we 
hymn and pray unto him; but what God will have done, 
that will neither Turk nor Saracen, nor the most part of us 
do. Whatsoever we imagine righteous, that must God ad- 
mit; but God's righteousness will not our hearts admit. 
Take another ensample: let there be two such as I spake 
of before, and I promise both, and the one because he 
feeleth not his disease cometh not: so is it of God's 
promises: no man is holpen by them but sinners that feel 
their sins, mourn and sorrow for them, and repent with 
all their hearts. For John Baptist went before Christ and 
preached repentance, that is, he preached the law of God 
right, and brought the people into knowledge of them- 
selves, and unto the fear of God, and then sent them unto 
Christ to be healed. For in Christ and for his sake only, 
hath God promised to receive us unto mercy, to forgive us, 
and to give us power to resist sin. How shall God save 
thee, when thou knowest not thy damnation? how shall 
Christ deliver thee from sin, when thou wilt not know- 
ledge thy sin? Now I pray thee how many thousands are 
there of them that say, I believe that Christ was born of 
a virgin, that he died, that he rose again, and so forth, and 
thou canst not bring them in belief that they have any sin 
at all! How many are there of the same sort, which thou 
canst not make believe that a thousand things are sin which 
God damneth for sin all the Scripture throughout! as to 
buy as good cheap as he can, and to sell as dear as he can, 
to raise the market of corn and victuals for his own vantage, 
without respect of his neighbour, or of the poor of the com- 
mon wealth, and such like. Moreover how many hundred 
thousand are there, which when they have sinned, and 
knowledge their sins; yet trust in a bald ceremony, or in 




Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



159 



a lousy friar's coat and merits, or in the prayers of them
that devour widows' houses, and eateth the poor out of
house and harbour, in a thing of his own imagination, in 
a foolish dream, and a false vision; and not in Christ's 
blood, and in the truth that God hath sworn! All these 
are faithless, for they follow their own righteousness, and 
are disobedient unto all manner [of] righteousness of 
God: both unto the righteousness of God's law, where- 
with he damneth all our deeds, (for though some of them 
see their sins for fear of pain, yet had they rather that 
such deeds were no sin,) and also unto the righteousness 
of the truth of God in his promises, whereby he saveth 
all that repent and believe them. For though they believe 
that Christ died, yet believe they not that he died for their 
sins, and that his death is a sufficient satisfaction for 
their sins, and that God for his sake will be a father unto 
them, and give them power to resist sin. 

Paul saith to the Romans in the xth chapter, If thou
confess with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord, and 
believe with thine heart that God raised him up from 
death, thou shalt be safe. That is, if thou believe he 
raised him up again for thy salvation. Many believe 
that God is rich and almighty, but not unto themselves, 
and that he will be good unto them, and defend them, 
and be their God. 

Pharaoh for pain of the plague, was compelled to 
confess his sins, but had yet no power to submit himself
unto the will of God, and to let the children of Israel
go, and to lose so great profit for God's pleasure, As 
our prelates confess their sins, saying, Though we be never 
so evil, yet have we the power. And again, the scribes 
and pharisees (say they) sat in Moses's seat, do as they 
teach, but not as they do; thus confess they that they are 
abominable. But to the second I answer, if they sat on 
Christ's seat they would preach Christ's doctrine, now 
preach they their own traditions, and therefore not to be 
heard. If they preached Christ, we ought to hear them 



160 



THE PARABLE OF 



[Tyndale. 



Th» devils 

etmhaMed 
Christ lo 
he I be Son 
of Gud. 



Simon 

Masai's 
fmtU. 



2 Pet il. 



1 Con i. 3, 



though they were never so abominable, as they of them- 
selves confess, and have yet no power to amend, neither 
to let loose Christ's flock to serve God in the Spirit, 
which they hold captive, compelling them to serve their 
false lies. The devils felt the power of Christ, and were 
compelled against their wills to confess that he was the 
Son of God, but had no power to be content therewith, 
neither to consent unto the ordinance and eternal counsel 
of the everlasting God; as our prelates feel the power 
of God against them, but yet have no grace to give room 
unto Christ, because that they (as the devil's nature is) 
will themselves sit in his holy temple, that is to wit, the 
consciences of men. 

Simon Magus believed, (Acts. iii.) with such a faith 
as the devils confessed Christ, but had no right faith, as 
thou seest in the said chapter. For he repented not, 
consenting unto the law of God. Neither believed the 
promises or longed for them, but wondered only at the mi- 
racles which Philip wrought, and because that he himself 
in Philip's presence had no power to use his witchcraft, 
sorcery and art magic, wherewith he mocked and deluded 
the wits of the people. He would have bought the gift 
of God, to have sold it much dearer, as his successors 
now do, and not the successors of Simon Peter. For 
were they Simon Peter's successors, they would preach 
Christ as he did; but they are Simon Magus's successors, 
of which Simon Peter well prophesied in the second chapter 
of his second Epistle, saying, There were false prophets 
among the people (meaning of the Jews) even as there 
shall be false teachers or doctors among you, which privily 
shall bring in sects damnable, (sects is part-taking, as one 
holdeth of Francis, another of Dominic, which thing also 
Paul rebuketh, I Cor i. and iii.) even denying the Lord 
that bought them (for they will not be saved by Christ, 
neither suffer any man to preach him to other.) And 
many shall follow their damnable ways, (thou wilt say, 
Shall God suffer so many to go out of the right way so 



Tyndale.] 



THE WICKED MAMMON. 



161 



long? I answer, many must follow their damnable ways, 
or else must Peter be a false prophet) by which the way 
of truth shall be evil spoken of, (as it is now at this present 
time, for it is heresy to preach the truth) and through 
covetousness shall they with feined words make merchan- 
dise of you. Of their merchandise and covetousness it needeth 
not to make rehearsal, for they that be blind see it evidently. 

Thus seest thou that James, when he saith, Faith without 
deeds is dead, and as the body without the spirit is dead,
so is faith without deeds, and the devils believe; that he
meaneth not of the faith and trust that we have in the
truth of God's promises, and his holy Testament, made
unto us in Christ's blood; which faith followeth repentance, 
and the consent of the heart unto the law of God, and 
maketh a man safe, and setteth him at peace with God. 
But speaketh of that false opinion and imagination where- 
with some say, I believe that Christ was born of a virgin, 
and that he died, and so forth. That believe they verily, 
and so strongly, that they are ready to slay whosoever 
would say the contrary. But they believe not that 
Christ died for their sins, and that his death hath appeased 
the wrath of God, and hath obtained for them all that 
God hath promised in the Scripture. For how can they 
believe that Christ died for their sins, and that he is their 
only and sufficient Saviour, seeing that they seek other 
Saviours of their own imagination, and seeing that they 
feel not their sins, neither repent, except that some repent 
(as I above said) for fear of pain, but for no love, nor consent 
unto the law of God, nor longing that they have for 
those good promises which he hath made them in Christ's 
blood. If they repented and loved the law of God, and 
longed for that help which God hath promised to give to 
all that call on him for Christ's sake, then verily must God's 
truth give them power and strength to do good works, when- 
soever occasion were given, either must God be a false God. 
But let God be true, and every man a liar as Scripture 
saith. For the truth of God lasteth ever, to whom only 
be all honour and glory for ever. Amen. 

VOL. II. M 



140 THE PARABLE OF &c. [Tyndale. 

Be not offended, most dear reader, that divers things 
are overseen, through negligence in this little treatise. For 
verily the chance was such, that I marvel that it is so well 
as it is. Moreover it becometh the book even so to come 
as a mourner, and in vile apparel to wait on his master, 
which sheweth himself now again, not in honour and 
glory, as between Moses and Elias; but in rebuke and 
shame, as between two murderers, to try his true friends, 
and to prove whether there be any faith on the earth. 



THE 

OBEDIENCE OF A CHRISTIAN MAN, 

AND 

HOW CHRISTIAN RULERS OUGHT 
TO GOVERN. 

WHEREIN ALSO (IF THOU MARK DILIGENTLY) THOU SHALT FIND EYES
TO PERCEIVE THE CRAFTY CONYEYANCE OF ALL JUGGLERS.



M 2 



WILLIAM TYNDALE 

OTHERWISE CALLED HITCHINS, 

TO THE READER. 

GRACE, peace, and increase of knowledge in 
our Lord Jesus Christ be with thee, reader, 
and with all that call on the name of the Lord 
unfeignedly, and with a pure conscience. Amen. 

Let it not make thee despair, neither yet dis- 
courage thee, O reader, that it is forbidden thee 
in pain of life and goods, or that it is made 
breaking of the king's peace, or treason unto his
highness to read the word of thy soul's health;
but much rather be bold in the Lord and comfort
thy soul, forasmuch as thou art sure, and hast an 
evident token through such persecution, that it is 
the true word of God; which word is ever hated 
of the world, neither was ever without per- 
secution, (as thou seest in all the stories of the 
Bible, both of the New Testament and also of the 
Old,) neither can be, no more than the sun can be
without his light. And forasmuch as contrary-
wise, thou art sure that the Pope's doctrine is
not of God, which, as thou seest, is so agreeable 
unto the world, and is so received of the world, 
or which rather so receiveth the world and the 
pleasures of the world, and seeketh nothing but 
the possessions of the world, and authority in the 


166 
PREFACE TO 
[TYNDALE.


Lots of tba 

world i$ 
hiitrcd of 

God &nd bii 
bo If gofl- 
peL 



dod de- 

fendclh Uis 
doctrme 
Mid self. 



Ood'fl word 
fightetb 

pcrcrilcs. 



world, and to bear a rule in the world; and per- 
secuteth the word of God, mid with all wiliness 
driveth people from it, and with false and sophis- 
tical reasons maketh them afraid of it: yea curseth 
them and excommunicateth them, and bringeth 
them in belief that they be damned if they look 
on it; and that it is but doctrine to deceive men; 
and moveth the blind powers of the world to 
slay, with fire, water, and sword, all that cleave 
unto it: for the world loveth that which is his, 
and hateth that which is chosen out of the world 
to serve God in the Spirit, as Christ saith to his 
disciples, John xv. If ye were of the world the 
world would love his own; but I have chosen you 
out of the world, and therefore the world hateth 
you. 

Another comfort hast thou, that as the weak 
powers of the world defend the doctrine of the 
world: so the mighty power of God defendeth 
the doctrine of God, which thing thou shalt 
evidently perceive if thou call to mind the won- 
derful deeds which God hath ever wrought for 
his word in extreme necessity, since the world 
began, beyond all man's reason, which are written, 
as Paul saith, (Rom. xv.) for our learning and not 
for our deceiving, that we, through patience 
and comfort of the Scripture, might have 
hope. The nature of God's word is to fight 
against hypocrites. It began at Abel, and hath 
ever since continued, and shall, I doubt not, un- 
til the last day. And the hypocrites have alway 
the world on their sides, as thou seest in the 


TYNDALE.] 
THE READER. 
167 


time of Christ; they had the elders, that is to
wit, the rulers of the Jews on their side; they 
had Pilate and the emperor's power on their side; 
they had Herod also on their side: moreover 
they brought all their worldly wisdom to pass, and 
all that they could think or imagine to serve for 
their purpose. First, to fear the people withal,
they excommunicated all that believed in him,
and put them out of the temple, as thou seest 
John ix. Secondly, they found the means to 
have him condemned by the emperor's power, and 
made it treason to Caesar to believe in him. 
Thirdly, they obtained to have him hanged as a 
thief or a murderer, which after their belly wis- 
dom, was a cause above all causes that no man 
should believe in him: for the Jews take it for a 
sure token of everlasting damnation, if a man be 
hanged; for it written in their law, (Deut. xxi.) 
Cursed is whosoever hangeth on [a] tree. Mo- 
ses also in the same place commandeth, If any 
man be hanged to take him down the same day 
and bury him, for fear of polluting or defiling 
the country, that is, lest they should bring the 
wrath and curse of God upon them. And there- 
fore the wicked Jews themselves, which with so 
venomous hate persecuted the doctrine of Christ, 
and did all the shame that they could do unto 
him, though they would fain have had Christ to 
hang still on the cross, and there to rot, as he 
should have done by the emperor's law: yet for 
fear of defiling their sabbath, and of bringing 
the wrath and curse of God upon them, begged 


168 PREFACE TO [TYNDALE. 

of Pilate to take him down, (John xix.) which 
was against themselves. 

Finally, when they had done all they could, and 
that they thought sufficient, and when Christ was 
in the heart of the earth, and so many bills and 
poleaxes about him, to keep him down, and when 
it was past man's help, then holp God. When 
man could not bring him again, God's truth 
fetched him again. The oath that God had 
sworn to Abraham, to David, and to other holy 
fathers and prophets, raised him up again to bless 
and save all that believe in him. Thus became 
the wisdom of the hypocrites foolishness. Lo, this 
was written for thy learning and comfort.

How wonderfully were the children of Israel 
locked in Egypt! In what tribulation, cumbrance, 
and adversity were they in! The land also that 
was promised them was far off, and full of great 
cities, walled with high walls up to the sky, and 
inhabited with great giants; yet God's truth 
brought them out of Egypt, and planted them in 
the land of the giants. This is also written for 
our learning: for there is no power against God's,
neither any wisdom against God's wisdom: he is 
stronger and wiser than all his enemies. What 
holp it Pharaoh to drown the men children: so lit-
tle, (I fear not,) shall it at the last help the pope 
and his bishops, to burn our men children, 
which manfully confess that Jesus Christ is the 
Lord, and that there is no other name given unto 
men to be saved by, as Peter testifieth, Acts iv. 

Who dried up the red sea? who slew Goliath? 



TYNDALE.] 
THE READER. 
169 

l4ow Mo- 
sea torn* 

who did all those wonderful deeds which thou 
readest in the Bible? who delivered the Israelites 
evermore from thraldom and bondage, as soon as 
they repented and turned to God? Faith verily, 
and God's truth, and the trust in the promises 
which he had made. Read the xith to the He- 
brews for thy consolation. 

When the children of Israel were ready to 
despair for the greatness and the multitude of the 
giants, Moses comforted them ever, saying, Re- 
member what your Lord God hath done for you 
in Egypt, his wonderful plagues, his miracles,
his wonders, his mighty hand, his stretched out 
arm, and what he hath done for you hitherto. He 
shall destroy them, he shall take their hearts 
from them, and make them fear and fly before 
you. He shall storm them, and stir up a tempest 
among them, and scatter them, and bring them to 
nought. He hath sworn, he is true, he will fulfil 
the promises that he hath made unto Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob. This is written for our learning: 
for verily he is a true God, and is our God as
well as theirs, and his promises are with us, as
well as with them; and he present with us as well 
as he was with them. If we ask, we shall obtain; 
if we knock, he will open; if we seek, we shall 
find; if we thirst, his truth shall fulfil our lust. 
Christ is with us until the world's end. (Matt. 
the last.) Let this little flock be bold therefore: 
for if God be on our side, what matter maketh 
it who be against us? be they bishops, cardinals, 
popes, or whatsoever names they will.


170 
PREFACE TO 
[TYNDALE. 

God iTKih 
tlie ffulb of 

dnen. 

God work* 
ctU hHck* 
w«rd. 

p 



Mark this also, if God send thee to the sea, 
and promise to go with thee, and to bring 
thee safe to land, he will raise up a tempest 
against thee, to prove whether thou wilt abide 
by his word, and that thou mayest feel thy 
faith and perceive his goodness: for if it 
were always fair weather and thou never 
brought into such jeopardy whence his mercy 
only delivered thee; thy faith should be but 
a presumption, and thou shouldest be ever 
unthankful to God and merciless unto thy neigh- 
bour.

If God promise riches, the way thereto is po- 
verty. Whom he loveth, him he chasteneth;
whom he exalteth, he casteth down: whom he 
saveth, he damneth first: he bringeth no man to 
heaven, except he send him to hell first: if he 
promise life, he slayeth first: when he buildeth,
he casteth all down first: he is no patcher, 
he cannot build on another man's foundation:
he will not work until all be past remedy, and 
brought unto such a case, that men may see, how 
that his hand, his power, his mercy, his goodness, 
and truth, hath wrought altogether. He will let no 
man be partaker with him of his praise and glory:
his works are wonderful, and contrary unto man's 
works. Whoever, save he, delivered his own 
son, his only son, his dear son, unto the death, 
and that for his enemies' sake: to win his enemy, 
to overcome him with love, that he might see 
love, and love again, and of love to do likewise to 
other men, and to overcome them with well doing. 


Tyndale.] 
THE READER, 
171 

Joseph saw the sun and the moon, and the 
twelve stars worshipping him. Nevertheless, 
ere that came to pass, God laid him where he 
could neither see sun nor moon, neither any star 
of the sky, and that many years; and also unde- 
served; to nurture him, to humble, to meek, and
to teach him God's ways, and to make him apt 
and meet for the room and honour against he 
came to it, that he might perceive and feel that 
it came of God, and that he might be strong in 
the Spirit to minister it godly. 

He promised the children of Israel a land 
with rivers of milk and honey; but brought them 
for the space of forty years into a land, where 
not only rivers of milk and honey were not, but 
where so much as a drop of water was not; to 
nurture them, and to teach them, as a father 
doth his son, and to do them good at the latter 
end; and that they might be strong in their 
spirit and souls, to use his gifts and benefits 
godly, and after his will.

He promised David a kingdom, and imme- 
mediately stirred up king Saul against him to 
persecute him; to hunt him as men do hares 
with greyhounds, and to ferret him out of every 
hole, and that for the space of many years; to 
tame him, to meek him, to kill his lusts; to make 
him feel other men's diseases; to make him mer- 
ciful; to make him understand that he was made 
king to minister and to serve his brethren, and 
that he should not think that his subjects were 
made to minister unto his lusts, and that it were 



tfoscpti. 



[Hraejjti*^ 



D*ri*i 




Otir fight* 

mf a to 
Rij^er wliilc 
God BgUU 
elb for ti& 



r 



The wis- 
doiu of the 



lawful for him to take away from them life and 
goods at his pleasure.

Oh, that our kings were so nurtured now-a- 
days! which our holy bishops teach of a far 
other manner, saying, Your Grace shall take 
your pleasure; yea, take what pleasure you list, 
spare nothing; we shall dispense with you, we 
have power, we are God's vicars: and let us 
alone with the realm, we shall take pain for you, 
and see that nothing be well: yoor Grace shall 
but defend the faith only. 

Let us, therefore, look diligently whereunto 
we are called, that we deceive not ourselves. 
We are called, not to dispute as the Pope's dis- 
ciples do; but to die with Christ, that we may 
live with him; and to suffer with him, that we 
may reign with him. We be called unto a king- 
dom that must be won by suffering only, as a 
sick man winneth health. God is he that doth all 
things for us, and fighteth for us, and we do but 
suffer only, Christ saith, (John xx.) As my Father 
sent me, so send I you; and (John xv.) If they 
persecute me, then shall they persecute you:
and Christ saith, (Matt. x.) I send you forth as 
sheep among wolves. The sheep fight not, but 
the shepherd fighteth for them, and careth for 
them. Be harmless as doves, therefore, saith 
Christ, and wise as serpents. The doves ima- 
gine no defence, nor seek to avenge them- 
selves. The serpent's wisdom is, to keep his 
head, and those parts wherein his life resteth.
Christ is our head, and God's word is that 


Tyndale.] 
THE READER. 
173 

wherein our life resteth. To cleave, therefore, 
fast unto Christ, and unto those promises which 
God hath made us for his sake, is our wisdom. 
Beware of men, (saith he,) for they shall deliver 
you up unto their councils, and shall scourge 
you; and ye shall be brought before rulers and 
kings for my sake: the brother shall betray, or 
deliver, the brother to death, and the father the 
son; and the children shall rise against father 
and mother, and put them to death. Hear what 
Christ saith more: The disciple is not greater 
than his master, neither the servant greater, or 
better than his lord. If they have called the 
good man of the house Beelzebub, how much 
rather shall they call his household servants so? 
And (Luke xivth.) saith Christ, Which of you, 
disposed to build a tower, sitteth not down first 
and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient 
to perform it? Lest when he hath laid the founda- 
tion, and then not able to perform it, all that 
behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man 
began to build, and was not able to make an 
end: so likewise, none of you that forsaketh not 
all that he hath, can be my disciple. Whoso- 
ever, therefore, casteth not this aforehand, I must 
jeopard life, goods, honour, worship, (and all 
that there is, for Christ's sake,) deceiveth him- 
self, and maketh a mock of himself, to the god- 
less hypocrites and infidels. No man can serve 
two masters, God and Mammon; that is to say, 
wicked riches also. (Matt. vi.) Thou must love 
Christ above all things: but that doest thou 
not if thou be not ready to forsake all for his 


He make til 
ft mock uf 
himself 
iLiAtcAatelh 
not the einl 
t*rc lie 
begitu 



How is the 
I'op ftnr*, 
which lak- 
eth all for 
Chmt's 
Make, but 
for»Akptli 
DO ugh t. 



174 
PREFACE TO 
[Tyndale.



Tribulation 
is Qur bnp- 



Tribiiljition 
ing* 






Tribulittion 
u Ihe gift 
af God. 



sake: if thou have forsaken all for his sake, then 
art thou sure that thou lovest him. Tribulation
is our right baptism, and is signified by plunging 
into the water. We that are baptized in the 
name of Christ (saith Paul, Rom. vi.) are bap-
tized to die with him. 

The Spirit, through tribulation, purgeth us, 
and killeth our fleshly wit, our worldly under- 
standing, and belly-wisdom, and filleth us full of 
the wisdom of God. Tribulation is a blessing 
that cometh of God, as witnesseth Christ, (Matt v.) 
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for 
righteousness' sake, for their's is the kingdom of 
heaven. Is not this a comfortable word? Who 
ought not rather to choose, and desire to be blessed 
with Christ in a little tribulation, than to be cursed 
perpetually with the world for a little pleasure? 

Prosperity is a right curse, and a thing that 
God giveth to his enemies. Woe be to you 
rich, saith Christ, (Luke vi.) lo, ye have your 
consolation: woe be to you that are full, for ye 
shall hunger: woe be to you that laugh, for ye 
shall weep: woe be to you when men praise you, 
for so did their fathers unto the false prophets: yea, 
and so have our fathers done to the false hypocrites. 
The hypocrites, with worldly preaching, have not 
gotten the praise only, but even the possessions 
also, and the dominion and rule of the whole world. 

Tribulation for righteousness is not a blessing 
only, but also a gift that God giveth unto none 
save his special friends. The apostles (Acts v.) 
rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer 
rebuke for Christ's sake. And Paul, in the second 


TYNDALE.] 
THE READER. 
175 


Epistle and third chapter to Timothy, saith, All 
that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer 
persecution: and (Phil. i.) he saith, Unto you it is 
given not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer 
for his sake. Here seest thou that it is God's gift 
to suffer for Christ's sake. 1 Peter iv. saith, Happy 
are ye if ye suffer for the name of Christ; for the 
glorious Spirit of God resteth in you. Is it not an 
happy things to be sure, that thou art sealed with 
God's Spirit to everlasting life? And, verily, thou 
art sure thereof, if thou suffer patiently for his 
sake. By suffering art thou sure; but by per- 
secuting canst thou never be sure: for Paul, 
(Rom. v.) saith. Tribulation maketh feeling; that 
is, it maketh us feel the goodness of God, and 
his help, and the working of his Spirit. And the
xii. chap. of the 2 Epistle to the Corinthians the
Lord said to Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee;
for my strength is made perfect through weak- 
ness. (2 Cor. xii.) Lo, Christ is never strong in 
us till we be weak. As our strength abateth, so 
groweth the strength of Christ in us: when we 
are clean emptied of our own strength, then are
we full of Christ's strength: and, look, how much
of our own strength remaineth in us, so much 
lacketh there of the strength of Christ. There- 
fore saith Paul, in the said place in the second 
Epistle to the Corinthians, Very gladly will I 
rejoice in my weakness, that the strength of 
Christ may dwell in me. Therefore have I delec- 
tation, saith Paul, in infirmities, in rebukes, in 
need, in persecutions, and in anguish for Christ's 



Cliriit, 



176
PREFACE TO 
[Tyndale. 



of rbe 
fltr^li is 

of the 

Spirit. 

Fli^sib. 



In two 
thijjgi we 
ftrcr ptil to 
oiir choke* 



Tli<^di(Te* 
n^ucr he- 
lm vcn llie 
ctiildmi of 
Ctod nr^d of 




sake; for when I am weak then am I strong. 
Meaning, that the weakness of the flesh is the 
strength of the Spirit. And by flesh understand
wit, wisdom, and all that is in a man before the 
Spirit of God come; and whatsoever springeth 
not of the Spirit of God, and of God's word. And ' 
of like testimonies is all the Scripture full.

Behold, God setteth before us a blessing and 
also a curse. A blessing, verily, and that a 
glorious and an everlasting, if we suffer tri- 
bulation and adversity with our Lord and Saviour 
Christ. And an everlasting curse, if, for a little 
pleasure sake, we withdraw ourselves from the 
chastising and nurture of God, wherewith he 
teacheth all his sons, and fashioneth them after 
his godly will, and maketh them perfect (as he 
did Christ,) and maketh them apt and meet 
vessels to receive his grace and his Spirit, that 
they might perceive and feel the exceeding 
mercy which we have in Christ, and the innu- 
merable blessings, and the unspeakable inheri- 
tance, whereto we are called and chosen, and 
sealed in our Saviour Jesus Christ, unto whom 
be praise for ever. Amen. 

Finally: whom God chooseth to reign ever- 
lastingly with Christ, him sealeth he with his 
mighty Spirit, and poureth strength into his 
heart, to suffer afflictions also with Christ, for 
bearing witness unto the truth. And this is the 
difference between the children of God and of 
salvation, and between the children of the devil 
and of damnation: that the children of God


Tyndale.] THE READER. 177 

have power in their hearts to suffer for God's 
word, which is their life and salvation, their 
hope and trust, and whereby they live in 
the soul and Spirit before God. And the 
children of the devil, in time of adversity, 
fly from Christ, whom they followed feignedly; 
their hearts not sealed with his holy and mighty 
Spirit, and get them to the standard of their 
right father the devil, and take his wages, the
pleasures of this world, which are the earnest of
everlasting damnation: which conclusion the 
xiith chapter to the Hebrews well confirmeth, 
saying, My son, despise not thou the chastising of 
the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of 
him: for whom the Lord loveth, him he chas-
tiseth; yea, and he scourgeth every son whom
he receiveth. Lo, persecution and adversity for
the truth's sake is God's scourge, and God's rod, 
and pertaineth unto all his children indifferently:
for when he saith he scourgeth every son, he 
maketh none exception. Moreover, saith the 
text, if ye shall endure chastising, God offereth 
himself unto you as unto sons. What son is it 
that the Father chastiseth not? If ye be not 
under correction, (whereof all are partakers,) 
then are ye bastards, and not sons. 

Forasmuch, then, as we must needs be bap- 
tized in tribulations, and through the red sea, 
and a great and a fearful wilderness, and a land 
of cruel giants, into our natural country; yea,
and inasmuch as it is a plain earnest that there
is no other way into the kingdom of life than

VOL. II. N


178 
PREFACE TO 
[Tyndale. 



liHve not 
pover to 
^o what 

ill 17 
wuuld. 



through persecution, and suffering of pain, and 
of very death, after the ensample of Christ:
therefore let us arm our souls with the comfort 
of the Scriptures: how that God is ever ready 
at hand in time of need to help us; and how 
that such tyrants and persecutors are but God's 
scourge, and his rod to chastise us. And as the 
Father hath alway in time of correction the rod 
fast in his hand, so that the rod doth nothing but 
as the Father moveth it; even so hath God all 
tyrants in his hand, and letteth them not to do 
whatsoever they would, but as much only as he 
appointeth them to do, and as far forth as it is 
necessary for us. And as when the child sub- 
mitteth himself unto his father's correction and 
nurture, and humbleth himself altogether unto the 
will of his father, then the rod is taken away:
even so, when we are come unto the knowledge 
of the right way, and have forsaken our own 
will, and offer ourselves clean to the will of 
God, to walk which way soever he will have us:
then turneth he the tyrants; or else if they 
enforce to persecute us any further, he putteth
them out of the way, according unto the com- 
fortable ensamples of the Scripture. 

Moreover, let us arm our souls with the 
promises both of help and assistance, and also of 
the glorious reward that followeth. Great is 
your reward in heaven, saith Christ, (Matt. v.) 
And he that knowledgeth me before men, him
will I knowledge before my Father that is in 
heaven; (Matt. x.) and, Call on me in time of



Tlic pfo- 
mists of 
God nre 
eonifort- 
nbkf ye&, 
thcjr nre all 
CDinforL 


Tyndale.] 
THE READER. 
179

tribulation, and I will deliver thee; (Psalm lxv.)
and, Behold the eyes of the Lord are over them 
that fear him, and over them that trust in his 
mercy; to deliver their souls from death, and to 
feed them in time of hunger. (Psalm xlvi.) And 
in Psialm xlvii. saith David, The Lord is nigh 
them that are troubled in their hearts, and the 
meek in spirit will he save. The tribulations of 
the righteous are many, and out of them all will 
the Lord deliver them. The Lord keepeth all 
the bones of them, so that not one of them shall be 
bruised. The Lord shall redeem the souls of 
his servants. And of such like consolations are 
all the Psalms full: would to God when ye read 
them ye understood them. And (Matt. x.) When 
they deliver you, take no thought what ye shall 
say; it shall be given you the same hour what ye 
shall say: for it is not ye that speak, but the 
Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. The 
very hairs of your heads are numbered, saith 
Christ also, Matt. x. If God care for our hairs, 
he much more careth for our souls, which he hath 
sealed with his Holy Spirit. Therefore, saith 
Peter, (1 Pet. iv.) cast all your care upon him;
for he careth for you. And Paul (1 Cor. x.)
saith, God is true, he will not suffer you to be
tempted above your might. And Psalm lxxi.
Cast thy care upon the Lord. 

Let thy care be to prepare thyself with all thy
strength, for to walk which way he will have
thee, and to believe that he will go with thee, 
and assist thee, and strengthen thee against all 

N 2 


180
PREFACE TO 
[TYNDALE.

tyrants, and deliver thee out of all tribulation. 
But what way, or by what means he will do 
it, that commit unto him, and his godly pleasure 
and wisdom, and cast that care upon him. And 
though it seem never so unlikely, or never so 
impossible unto natural reason, yet believe sted- 
fastly that he will do it. And then shall he (ac- 
cording to his old use) change the course of the 
worlds even in the twinkling of an eye, and come 
suddenly upon our giants, as a thief in the 
night, and compass them in their wiles and 
worldly wisdom: when they cry Peace and all is 
safe; then shall their sorrows begin, as the 
pangs of a woman that travaileth with child:
and then shall he destroy them, and deliver thee, 
unto the glorious praise of his mercy and truth. 
Amen. 

The de- 

persecu* 
ton, add 
Ibey thil 
Ml from 

ihe word 
are tbrcat- 
eoed. 

And as pertaining unto them that despise 
God's word, counting it as a phantasy, or a 
dream; and to them also that for fear of a little 
persecution fall from it, set this before thine 
eyes; — how God since the beginning of the 
world, before a general plague, ever sent his 
true prophets and preachers of his word to warn 
the people, and gave them space to repent. But 
they, for the greatest part of them, hardened 
their hearts, and persecuted the word that was 
sent to save them. And then God destroyed 
them utterly, and took them clean from the earth. 
As thou seest what followed the preaching of 
Noah in the old world; what followed the 


Tyndale.]
THE READER.
181

preaching of Lot among the Sodomites; and
the preaching of Moses and Aaron among the 
Egyptians; and that suddenly against all pos- 
sibility of man's wit. Moreover, as oft as the 
children of Israel fell from God to the worship- 
ping of images, he sent his prophets unto them;
and they persecuted and waxed hard-hearted:
and then he sent them into all places of the world 
captive. Last of all he sent his own Son to 
them, and they waxed more hard-hearted than 
ever before: and see what a fearful example of 
his wrath and cruel vengeance he hath made of 
them to all the world, now almost fifteen 
hundred years. 

Unto the old Britons also (which dwelled 
where our nation doth now,) preached Gildas, 
and rebuked them of their wickedness, and pro- 
phesied both to the spiritual (as they will be 
called,) and unto the lay men also, what ven- 
geance would follow, except they repented. But 
they waxed hard-hearted, and God sent his 
plagues and pestilences among them, and sent 
their enemies in upon them on every side, and 
destroyed them utterly. 

Mark, also, how Christ threateneth them that 
forsake him, for whatsoever cause it be; whether 
for fear, either for shame, either for loss of 
honour, friends, life, or goods. He that denieth 
me before men, him will I deny before my 
Father that is in heaven. He that loveth father 
or mother more than me, is not worthy of me. 
All this saith he Matt. x. And Mark viii. he 

Noah, Lot, 
Movrs, and 
Aaron. 

Tlie pro- 

CbrinL 

Gitilaa. 

Hicy be 
BfiiHtitnl, 
tliHt is de^ 
rilish ; 
for the 
devil U ft 
spiriL 


182
PREFACE TO 
[TYNDALE.

Wc mtiftt 
Iti do CUi 

Chnit. 

lliivni ttial 
cottir ]ig;ua» 

Wbf God 

JfLictti liU 
£kcE falL 

saith, Whosoever is ashamed of me, or my
words, among this adulterous and sinful gene- 
ration, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed 
when he cometh in the glory of his Father, with 
his holy angels. And Luke ix. also: None 
that layeth his hand to the plough, and looketh 
back, is meet for the kingdom of heaven.

Nevertheless, yet if any man have resisted 
ignorantly, as Paul did, let him look on the 
truth which Paul wrote after he came to know- 
ledge. Also, if any man clean against his heart 
(but overcome with the weakness of the flesh,) 
for fear of persecution, have denied, as Peter 
did, or have delivered his book, or put it away 
secretly; let him (if he repent,) come again, and 
take better hold, and not despair, or take it for a 
sign that God hath forsaken him; for God oft- 
times taketh his strength even from his very elect, 
when they either trust in their own strength, or 
are negligent to call to him for his strength. And 
that doth he to teach them, and to make them 
feel that in that fire of tribulation, for his word's 
sake, nothing can endure and abide save his 
word, and that strength only which he hath pro- 
mised. For the which strength he will have us to 
pray unto him night and day, with all instance. 

That Ibtf 

That thou mayest perceive how that the Scrip- 
ture ought to be in the mother tongue, and that 
the reasons which our spirits make for the con- 
trary, are but sophistry and false wiles to fear 
thee from the light, that thou mightest follow 

in tbc Ea^ 


Tyndale.] 
THE READER. 
183

them blindfold, and be their captive to honour 
their ceremonies, and to offer to their belly. 

First, God gave the children of Israel a law 
by the hand of Moses, in their mother tongue;
and all the prophets wrote in their mother 
tongue, and all the Psalms were in the mother 
tongue. And there was Christ but figured, and de- 
scribed in ceremonies, in riddles, in parables, and 
in dark prophecies. What is the cause that we 
may not have the Old Testament, with the New 
also, which is the light of the Old, and wherein 
is openly declared before thine eyes that which 
there was darkly prophesied? I can imagine no 
cause verily, except it be that we should not see 
the work of Antichrist and juggling of hypocrites. 
What should be the cause, that we, which walk 
in the broad day, should not see as well as they 
that walked in the night, or that we should not 
see as well at noon as they did in the twilight?
Came Christ to make the world more blind? By 
this means Christ is the darkness of the world, 
and not the light, as he saith himself. (John viii.)

Moreover Moses saith, (Deut. vi.) Hear Israel,
let these words which I command thee this day,
stick fast in thine heart, and whet them on thy
children, and talk of them as thou sittest in thine
house, and as thou walkest by the way, and when
thou liest down, and when thou risest up, and
bind them for a token to thine hand, and let 
them be a remembrance between thine eyes, 
and write them on the posts and gates of thine 
house. This was commanded generally unto all 


184
PREFACE TO 
[Tyndale.

No, 

Sir J(>liu*s 

gllOSllf 

ti'bildrca. 

men. How cometh it that God's word pertaineth
less unto us, than unto them? yea, how cometh 
it, that our Moseses forbid us, and command us 
the contrary, and threaten us if we do, and will 
not that we once speak of God's word? How 
can we whet God's word (that is, to put it in
(practice, use, and exercise) upon our children 
and household, when we are violently kept from 
it and know it not? How can we (as Peter com-
mandeth) give a reason of our hope, when we 
wot not what it is that God hath promised, or 
what to hope? Moses also commandeth in the 
said chapter: If the son ask what the testimonies,
laws, and observances of the Lord mean; that 
the father teach him. If our children ask what 
our ceremonies (which are more than the Jews 
were) mean: no father can tell his son. And in 
the xith chapter, he repeateth all again for fear,
of forgetting.

They will say haply, the Scripture requireth a 
pure mind, and a quiet mind. And therefore 
the lay man because he is altogether cumbred 
with worldly business cannot understand them. 
If that be the cause, then it is a plain case, that 
our prelates understand not the Scriptures them- 
selves: for no lay man is so tangled with worldly 
business as they are. The great things of the 
world are ministered by them; neither do the 
lay people any great thing, but at their assign- 
ment.

If the Scripture were in the mother tongue,
they will say, then would the lay people under-


Tyndale.] 
THE READER. 
185

stand it, every man after his own ways. Where- 
fore serveth the curate, but to teach him the 
right way? Wherefore were the holy days 
made, but that the people should come and learn? 
Are ye not abominable school-masters, in that ye 
take so great wages if ye will not teach? If ye 
would teach, how could ye do it so well, and 
with so great profit, as when the lay people have 
the Scripture before them in their mother tongue?
for then should they see by the order of the text 
whether thou juggledst or not: and then would 
they believe it, because it is the Scripture of God, 
though thy living be never so abominable.
Where now, because your living and your 
preaching are so contrary, and because they 
grope out in every sermon your open and ma- 
nifest lies, and smell your unsatiable covetousness,
they believe you not when you preach truth. 
But alas! the curates themselves (for the most 
part) wot no more what the New or Old Testa- 
ment meaneth, than do the Turks: neither know 
they of any more than that they read at mass, 
matins, and evensong, which yet they under- 
stand not: neither care they, but even to mumble 
up so much every day, as the pie and popinjay 
speak they wot not what to fill their bellies 
withal. If they will not let the lay man have 
the word of God in his mother tongue, yet let 
the priests have it, which for a great part of them 
do understand no Latin at all: but sing, and say, 
and patter all day with the lips only, that which 
the heart understandeth not. 

Holy d^ijTi- 

Our icIioqI 

tench not. 

WTiy Ibe 

prcAcfacrf 
arc not be^ 
licrcd when 
they sfty 
ti'Uth. 

Tb<> cur*t« 
wot not 
what H BU 
Me mcftO' 
eth. 

The pdeat» 
underBtunil 


186
PREFACE TO 
[TYNDALE.

Sciirch ihis 
Scriplnres 

Who 

Mf^iast 
Cliristj is 
kuDwa by 

Christ commandeth to search the Scriptures.
(John. v.) Though that miracles bare record 
unto his doctrine, yet desired he no faith to be 
given either to his doctrine, or to his mira- 
cles, without record of the Scripture. When 
Paul preached (Acts xvii.) the other searched 
the Scriptures daily, whether they were as he 
alleged them. Why shall not I likewise see, whe-
ther it be the Scripture thou allegest? yea, why 
shall I not see the Scripture, and the circumstances, 
and what goeth before and after, that I may 
know whether thine interpretation be the right 
sense, or whether thou jugglest, and drawest the 
Scripture violently unto thy carnal and fleshly 
purpose? or whether thou be about to teach me 
or to deceive me? 

Christ saith, that there shall come false pro- 
phets in his name, and say that they themselves 
are Christ; that is, they shall so preach Christ 
that men must believe in them, in their holiness,
and things of their imagination without God's word; 
yea, and that against Christ, or Antichrist, that 
shall come, is nothing but such false prophets,
that shall juggle with the Scripture, and 
beguile the people with false interpretations, as 
all the false prophets, scribes and pharisees did 
in the Old Testament. How shall I know whe- 
ther ye are against Christ, or false prophets, or 
no, seeing ye will not let me see how ye allege 
the Scriptures? Christ saith: By their deeds 
ye shall know them. — Now when we look on your 
deeds we see that ye are all sworn together, and 


Tyndale.] 
THE READER. 
187

have separated yourselves from the lay people, 
aud have a several kingdom among yourselves, 
and several laws of your own making, wherewith 
ye violeutly bind the lay people that never con- 
sented unto the making of them. A thousand 
things forbid ye which Christ made free, and 
dispense with them again for money: neither is 
there any exception at all, but lack of money. 
Ye have a secret council by yourselves. All 
other men's secrets and counsels know ye, and no 
man your's: ye seek but honour, riches, promo- 
tion, authority, and to reign over all, and will obey 
no man. If the father give you ought of cour- 
tesy, ye will compel the son to give it violently, 
whether he will or not, by craft of your own 
laws. These deeds are against Christ.

When a whole parish of us hire a school-
master to teach our children, what reason is it, 
that we should be compelled to pay this school- 
master his wages, and he should have license to 
go where he will, and to dwell in another country, 
and to leave our children untaught? Doth not 
the Pope so? Have we not given up our tithes 
of courtesy unto one, for to teach us God's 
word? and cometh not the Pope, and compelleth 
us to pay it violently to them that never teach? 
Maketh he not one parson, which cometh never 
at us? yea one shall have five or six, or as many 
as he can get, and wotteth oftentimes where 
never one of them standeth. Another is made 
Vicar, to whom he giveth a dispensation to go 
where he will, and to set in a parish priest, which 

kingdom^ 

Severn! 
Ini^B. 

Wiirtt 
CitrbtlooA- 

tbe Pijpe 
bujdeiU to 
loose It s- 
gnin (or 

A ser rft 
Coiin^cL 

ParsQD. 

Vicur, 

Piirbh 


188 
PREFACE TO 
[Tyndale.

can but minister a sort of dumb ceremonies. 
And he, because he hath most labour and least 
profit, polleth on his part, and setteth here a mass 
penny, there a trental, yonder dirige money,
and for his bead roll, with a confession penny and 
such like. And thus are we never taught, and 
are yet nevertheless compelled: yea, compelled 
to hire many costly school-masters. These 
deeds are verily against Christ. Shall we there- 
jore judge you by your deeds, as Christ com- 
mandeth? So are ye false prophets, and the 
disciples of Antichrist, or against Christ. 

The sermons which thou readest in the Acts 
of the apostles, and all that the apostles preached 
were no doubt preached in the mother tongue. 
Why then might they not be written in the 
mother tongue? As if one of us preach a good 
sermon, why may it not be written? Saint 
Jerom also translated the Bible into his mother 
tongue. Why may not we also? They will say 
it cannot be translated into our tongue it is so 
rude. It is not so rude as they are false liars.
For the Greek tongue agreeth more with the 
English than with the Latin. And the properties 
of the Hebrew tongue agreeth a thousand times 
more with the English, than with the Latin. The 
manner of speaking is both one, so that in a 
thousand places thou needest not but to translate 
it into the English, word for word, when thou 
must seek a compass in the Latin, and yet shall
have much work to translate it well favouredly, 
so that it have the same grace and sweetness,

tiea of the 

agree with 
IheEo* 

glUTi- 

4 

I 


TYNDALE.]
THE READER. 
189

Cptitrjirjr 

CoTitrnry 

sense and pure understanding with it in the 
Latin, and as it hath in the Hebrew. A thou- 
sand parts better may it be translated into the 
English, than into the Latin. Yea, and except 
my memory fail me, and that I have forgotten 
what I read when I was a child; thou shalt find in 
the English chronicle, how that King Adelstone
caused the holy Scripture to be translated into
the tongue that then was in England, and how 
the prelates exhorted him thereto. 

Moreover seeing that one of you ever preacheth 
contrary to another: And when two of you 
meet, the one disputeth and brawleth with the 
other, as it were two scolds. And forasmuch 
as one holdeth this doctor, another that. One 
followeth Duns, another Saint Thomas, another
Bonaventure, Alexander de Hales, Raymond, 
Lyre, Brigot, Dorbel, Holcot, Gorram, Trum- 
bett, Hugy de Sancto Victore, De Monte Regio, 
De Nova Villa, De Media Villa, and such like out 
of number. So that if thou hadst but of every 
author one book, thou couldst not pile them up 
in any warehouse in London, and every author 
is one contrary unto an other. In so great diver- 
sity of spirits, how shall I know who lieth, and 
who sayeth truth? Whereby shall I try and 
judge them? Verily by God's word which 
only is true. But how shall I that do, when thou 
wilt not let me see Scripture? 

Nay, say they, the Scripture is so hard, that 
thou couldst never understand it but by the doctors. 
That is, I must measure the meteyard by the 


190 
PREFACE TO 
[TYNDALE.

Aotidimt 

raals of 
Itie tree 

The Scrip- 
ture 19 the 
%r\al of ^1 
doclriuCj 
nDd the 
rigUt touch 
itoae. 

Hiilafaphj' 

Artfitotle* 

cloth. Here be twenty cloths of divers lengths 
and of divers breadths; how shall I be sure of 
the length of the meteyard by them? I sup- 
pose, rather, I must be first sure of the length of 
the meteyard, aud thereby measure and judge 
the clothes. If I must first beheve the doctor,
then is the doctor first true, and the truth of the 
Scripture dependeth of his truth; and so the 
truth of God springeth of the truth of man. 
Thus Antichrist turneth the roots of the trees 
upward. What is the cause that we damn 
some of Origen's works, and allow some? How 
know we that some is heresy and some not? 
By the Scripture, I trow. How know we that 
St. Augustine (which is the best, or one of the 
best, that ever wrote upon the Scripture,) wrote 
many things amiss at the beginning, as many 
other doctors do? Verily, by the Scriptures; 
as he himself well perceived afterward, when he 
looked more diligently upon them, and revoked 
many things again. He wrote of many things 
which he understood not when he was newly 
converted, yet he had thoroughly seen the Scrip- 
tures; and followed the opinions of Plato, and 
the common persuasions of man's wisdom that 
were then famous. 

They will say yet more shamefully, that no 
man can understand the Scriptures without phi- 
lautia, that is to say, philosophy. A man must 
first be well seen in Aristotle, ere he can under- 
stand the Scripture, say they. Aristotle's doc- 
trine is, that the world was without beginning, 


TYNDALE.]
THE READER.
191

ScHpliiri?. 

and shall be without end; and that the first man 
never was, and the last shall never be. And 
that God doth all of necessity, neither careth 
what we do, neither will ask any accounts of 
that we do. Without this doctrine, how could 
we understand the Scripture, that saith, God 
created the world of nought, and God worketh 
all things of his free will, and for a secret pur- 
pose; and that we shall all rise again, and that 
God will have accounts of all that we have done 
in this life. Aristotle saith, Give a man a law
and he hath power of himself to do or fulfil the 
law, and becometh righteous with working 
righteously. But Paul, and all the Scripture
saith, That the law doth but utter sin only, 
and helpeth not. Neither hath any man power 
to do the law till the Spirit of God be given him 
through faith in Christ. Is it not a madness then 
to say, that we could not understand the Scrip- 
ture without Aristotle? Aristotle's righteous-
ness, and all his virtues, spring of man's free 
will. And a Turk, and every infidel and ido- 
later, may be righteous, and virtuous with that 
righteousness and those virtues. Moreover, 
Aristotle's felicity and blessedness standeth in 
avoiding of all tribulations; and in riches, health, 
honour, worship, friends, and authority; which 
felicity pleaseth our spiritualty well. Now, 
without these, and a thousand such like points, 
couldst thou not understand Scripture, which
saith that righteousness cometh by Christ, and 
not of man's will; and how that virtues are the 


192 
PREFACE TO 
[TYNDALE.

P1)i1o90[iUy< 
Paul 

mnn will 
Ci!acb. if we 
desiiT, God 
will tcfttii . 

The order 
of If aclliiEi^. 

fruits aud the gift of God's Spirit, and that Christ 
blesseth us in tribulations, persecution, and ad- 
versity. How, I say, couldst thou understand 
the Scripture without philosophy, inasmuch as 
Paul, in the second to the Colossians, warned 
them to beware, lest any man should spoil them 
(that is to say, rob them of their faith in Christ,) 
through philosophy and deceitful vanities, and 
through the traditions of men, and ordinances 
after the world, and not after Christ. 

By this means, then, thou wilt that no man 
teach another, but that every man take the 
Scripture and learn by himself. Nay, verily, so 
say I not. Nevertheless, seeing that ye will not 
teach, if any man thirst for the truth, and read 
the Scripture by himself, desiring God to open 
the door of knowledge unto him, God, for his 
truth's sake, will and must teach him. Howbeit, 
my meaning is, that as a master teacheth his ap- 
prentice to know all the points of the meteyard; 
first, how many inches, how many feet, and the 
half yard, the quarter, and the nail, and then 
teacheth him to mete other things thereby: even 
so will I that ye teach the people God's law, 
and what obedience God requireth of us to 
father and mother, master, lord, king, and all 
superiors, and with what friendly love he com- 
mandeth one to love another. And teach them 
to know that natural venom, and birth poison, 
which moveth the very hearts of us to rebel 
against the ordinances and will of God, and 
prove that no man is righteous in the sight of 

I 

I 


TYNDALE.]
THE READER.
193

God, but that we are all damned by the law. 
And then, (when thou hast meeked them and 
feared them with the law,) teach them the Tes- 
tament and promises which God hath made unto 
us in Christ, and how much he loveth us in 
Christ. And teach them the principles and the 
ground of the faith, and what the sacraments 
signify, and then shall the Spirit work with thy 
preaching, and make them feel. So would it 
come to pass, that as we know by natural wit 
what followeth of a true principle of natural 
reason; even so, by the principles of the faith, 
and by the plain Scriptures, and by the circum- 
stances of the text, should we judge all men's 
exposition, and all men's doctrine, and should 
receive the best, and refuse the worst. I would 
have you to teach them also the properties and 
manner of speakings of the Scripture, and how 
to expound proverbs and similitudes. And 
then, if they go abroad and walk by the fields 
and meadows of all manner [of] doctors and phi- 
losophers, they could catch no harm. They 
should discern the poison from the honey, and 
bring home nothing but that which is wholesome. 

But now do ye clean contrary, ye drive them 
from God's word, and will let no man come there- 
to until he have been two years master of art. 
First they nosel them in sophistry, and in bene- 
fundatum. And there corrupt they their judg- 
ments with apparent arguments, and with alleg- 
ing unto them texts of logic, of natural philau- 
tia, of metaphysic, and moral philosophy, and of 

VOL II. o 

Ttie disor- 
der, or 
oirertli«^firt 
order of 
otir school- 
men. 

Tbe school 
doctrit)i% aa 
they ckll iU 
Cf>rnipteth 
the jiidg- 
mcnls of 
yotdlu 


194 
PREFACE TO 
[Tyndale.

nity. 

Yet ill thii 
titcy nil 
ftgne, thai 
no mAn u 

Raved hy 
Christ but 
hy holy 
wnrka, Hnd 
Ihnt Clmat 
hjilh given 
by his God* 
liead to ihe 
pope and 
nil Ijis poiv- 
er; nnd 
that tbc 
pope niJiy 
tire 
ChriM'fl 
itieriti to 
Vflmin iw 
wiU, ntid 
take tlii^m 
from wlioiii 
lie wilL 

all manner [of] books of Aristotle, and of all man- 
ner [of] doctors which they yet never saw. More- 
over, one holdeth this, another that; one is a real, 
another a nominal. What wonderful dreams have 
they of their predicaments, universals, second in- 
tentions, qui dities, haec scities, and relatives. And 
whether specia fundata in chimera, be vera spe- 
cies. And whether this proposition be true, non 
ens est aliquid, whether ens be aequivocum, or 
univocum. Ens is a voice only say some. Ens 
is univocum saith another, and descendeth into 
ens creatum, and into ens increatum, per modus 
intrinsecos. When they have thiswise brawled 
eight, ten, or twelve or more years, and after that 
their judgments are utterly corrupt: then they be- 
gin their divinity; not at the Scripture, but every 
man taketh a sundry doctor, which doctors are as 
sundry and as divers, the one contrary unto the 
other, as there are divers fashions and monstrous 
shapes, none like another among our sects of re- 
ligion. Every religion, every university, and 
almost every man hath a sundry divinity. Now 
whatsoever opinions every man findeth with 
his doctor, that is his gospel, and that only 
is true with him, and that holdeth he all his 
life long, and every man to maintain his doctor 
withal, corrupteth the Scripture, and fashioneth 
it after his own imagination, as a potter doth his 
clay. Of what text thou provest hell, will 
another prove purgatory, another limbo patrum, 
and another the assumption of our lady, and 
another shall prove of the same text that an ape 


Tyndale-J 
THE READER. 
195

hath a tail. And of what text the grave friar 
proveth that our lady was without original sin, 
of the same shall the black friar prove that she 
was conceived in original sin; and all this do 
they with apparent reasons, with false similitudes 
and likenesses, and with arguments and per- 
suasions of man's wisdom. Now there is no other 
division or heresy in the world, save man's wis- 
dom, and when man's foolish wisdom interpreteth 
the Scripture. Man's wisdom scattereth, divideth 
and maketh sects; while the wisdom of one is 
that a white coat is best to serve God in, and 
another saith a black, and another a gray, another 
a blue; and while one saith God will hear your 
prayer in this place, another saith in that place;
and while one saith this place is holier, and 
another that place is holier; and this religion is 
holier than that; and this saint is greater with 
God than that; and an hundred thousand like 
things. Man's wisdom is plain idolatry, neither 
is there any other idolatry than to imagine of God 
after man's wisdom. God is not man's imagination, 
but that only which he saith of himself. God is 
nothing but his law and his promises, that is to say, 
that which he biddeth thee to do, and that which 
he biddeth thee believe and hope. God is but his 
word, as Christ saith, (John viii.) I am that I say 
unto you; that is to say, That which I preach am 
I, my words are spirit and life. God is that only 
which he testifieth of himself; and to imagine any 
other thing of God than that, is damnable idolatry. 
Therefore saith the cxviiith Psalm, Happy are 

False siiiiN- 
do ID bc- 

Coats > 

PI net. 
Odc reli- 
gion H IkO- 
lier ihtm 

Man'* wh' 
doin is ido* 

Wliat God 


196 
PREFACE TO 
[Tyndale.

TlK'n tliink 
(lie pnputs 
I heir wick- 
ed life will 
eliew Itself 
to iUeir 
■hHtiiL« nni] 
ranfirsjou. 

Tlie pope 
licenced 
the people 
t4i r^jid aad 
fjny what 
thi'y woulrlp 
■are Ihe 
tmrh. 

But llie 
one fyrbid- 
detli not 
their iK>inp 
and belly ' 
cheer h» the 
other doth* 

they which search the testimonies of the Lord, 
that is to say, that which God testifieth and wit- 
nesseth unto us. But how shall I that do, when ye 
will not let me have his testimonies or witnesses 
in a toungue which I understand? Will ye resist 
God? will ye forbid him to give his Spirit unto 
the lay as well unto you? Hath he not made the 
English tongue? Why forbid ye him to speak in 
the english tongue then as well as in the Latin?
Finally, that this threatening and forbidding the 
lay people to read the Scripture is not for love of 
your souls (which they care for, as the fox doth 
for the geese) is evident, and clearer than the 
sun, inasmuch as they permit and suffer you to read 
Robin Hood, Bevis of Hampton, Hercules, Hector, 
and Troilus, with a thousand histories and fables of 
love and wantonness, and of ribaldry, as filthy as 
heart can think; to corrupt the minds of youth 
withal, clean contrary to the doctrine of Christ 
and his apostles: for Paul (Eph. v.) saith, See 
that fornication and all uncleanness or covet- 
ousness be not once named among you, as it 
becometh saints: neither filthiness, neither foolish 
talking nor jesting, which are not comely: for 
this ye know, that no whoremonger either unclean 
person or covetous person, (which is the wor- 
shipper of images,) hath any inheritance in the 
kingdom of Christ and of God. And after saith 
he, Through such things cometh the wrath of God 
upon the children of unbelief. Now seeing they 
permit you freely to read those things which cor- 
rupt your minds and rob you of the kingdom of 


Tyndale.]
THE READER. 
197

God and Christ, and bring the wrath of God up- 
on you, how is this forbidding for love of your 
souls?

A thousand reasons more might be made, as 
thou mayest see in Paraclesis Erasmi, and in his 
preface to the Paraphrase of Matthew, unto 
which they should be compelled to hold their 
peace, or to give shameful answers. But I hope 
that these are sufficient unto them that trust the 
truth. God for his mercy and truth shall well open 
them more: yea, and other secrets of his godly 
wisdom, if they be diligent to cry unto him, 
which grace grant God. Amen. 


THE PROLOGUE 
UNTO THE BOOK. 

FORASMUCH as our holy prelates and our ghostly re- 
ligious, which ought to defend God's word, speak evil 
of it, and do all the shame they can to it; and rail on it and 
bear their captives in hand, that it causeth insurrection and 
teacheth the people to disobey their heads and governors, 
and moveth them to rise against their princes; and to make 
all common and to make havock of other men's goods:
therefore have I made this little treatise that followeth, con- 
taining all obedience that is of God; in which, (whosoever 
readeth it) shall easily perceive, not the contrary only, and 
that they lie, but also the very cause of such blasphemy, 
and what stirreth them so furiously to rage and to belie the 
truth. 

Prelates 
not profes- 
lora, but 
profancra 
of Ood*8 
word. 

The obedi- 
enoeof 
monks and 
friam is 
not here. 
For they 
are not of 
God, but of 
their own 
feigning. 


198
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[Tyndale.

Tbr bypo- 

fhttt lo 
God'i word 
wliicL tbey 

of 

Gad waru- 
ctb ^re he 
strike. 

IVh^ii God 

thf idtibiiry 
of t be liy po- 
int rJip tbeo 
My rbey, 
tbtti new 
lifarmDir ii 
the cauie 
t hereof t 

Christ WM 
atciiiec) of 

tina. 

Howbeit it is no new thing unto the word of God to be 
railed upon, neither is this the first time that hypocrites
have ascribed to God's word the vengeance whereof they 
themselves were ever [the] cause: for the hypocrites with
their false doctrine and idolatry have evermore led the wrath
and vengeance of God upon the people, so sore that God
could no longer forbear nor defer his punishment. Yet 
God, which is always merciful, before he would take ven- 
geance, hath ever sent his true prophets and true preachers, 
to warn the people that they might repent. But the people
for the most part, and namely the heads and rulers, through 
comfort and persuading of the hypocrites, have ever waxed 
more hard hearted than before, and have persecuted the 
word of God and his prophets. Then God, which is 
also righteous, hath always poured his plagues upon
them without delay, which plagues the hypocrites 
ascribe unto God's word, saying, See what mischief 
is come upon us since this new learning came up, and this 
new sect, and this new doctrine. This seest thou Jere- 
miah xliv. where the people cried to go to their old idolatry
again, saying, Since we left it, we have been in all ne-
cessity and have been consumed with war and hunger. But 
the prophet answered them that their idolatry went unto the 
heart of God, so that he could no longer suffer the mali- 
ciousness of their own imaginations or inventions; and that 
the cause of all such mischiefs was, because they would not 
hear the voice of the Lord and walk in his law, ordinances, 
and testimonies. The scribes and the pharisees laid also 
to Christ's charge (Luke xxiii.) that he moved the 
people to sedition, and said to Pilate, we found this fel- 
low perverting the people and forbidding to pay tribute to 
Caesar, and saith that he is Christ, a king. And again in the
same chapter, he moveth the people, said they, teaching 
throughout Jewry, and began at Galilee even to this place. 
So likewise laid they to the apostles' charge, as thou mayest 
see in the Acts. St. Cyprian also, and St. Augustin, and 
many other more, made works in defence of the word of 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
199

God against such blasphemies: so that thou mayest see 
how that it is no new thing, but an old and accustomed 
thing with the hypocrites, to wite God's word and the 
true preachers of all the mischief which their lying doc- 
trine in the very cause of.

Never the later in very deed, after the preaching of 
God's word, because it is not truly received, God sendeth 
great trouble into the world; partly to avenge himself of 
the tyrants and persecutors of his word, and partly to de- 
stroy those wordly people which make of God's word no- 
thing but a cloak of their fleshly liberty. They are not 
all good that follow the gospel. Christ (Matt. xiii.) likeneth 
the kingdom of heaven unto a net cast into the sea that 
catcheth fishes both good and bad. The kingdom of 
heaven is the preaching of the gospel, unto which come 
both good and bad. But the good are few, Christ 
calleth them therefore a little flock. (Luke xii.) For they 
are ever few that come to the gospel of a true intent,
seeking therein nothing but the glory and praise of God,
and offering themselves freely and willingly to take ad- 
versity with Christ for the gospel's sake, and for bearing 
record unto the truth, that all men may hear it. The 
greatest number come, and ever came, and followed even 
Christ himself for a worldly purpose: as thou mayest well 
see, (John vi.) how that almost five thousand followed 
Christ, and would also have made him a king, because he 
had well fed them: whom he rebuked, saying, Ye seek me 
not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye ate of the 
bread and were filled; and drove them away from him with 
hard preaching.

Even so now (as ever) the most part seek liberty; they 
be glad when they hear the unsatiable covetousness of the 
spiritualty rebuked; when they hear their falshood and 
wiles uttered; when tyranny and oppression is preached 
against; when they hear how kings and all officers should 
rule christianly and brotherly, and seek no other thing save 
the wealth of their subjects; and when they hear that they 

prL'Acbiii|^ 
of thti gofl * 
peU 

tlotk II lit^ 
lie flovk. 

Ad our 
prelates da 
not tnkf; 
tbeir vocfl- 
tioa to seek 
Goi3*a gitiry 
nnd bo - 
noor, but 
to Ufu iirt- 

promoti? 
tbimiclrca 
lo dignity* 

Liberty, 


200
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

God 6e- 

btroytth. 
oiiv wicked 
-With a no- 
ting. 

God^s word 
ii out tlie 
caiifip of 
cviL 

diAciples 
wi?rc lol;g 
«viik And 
worldly 
niiaded. 

WliHl the 
[wpe's doc- 
trine cati- 
icth ■ he 
command- 
eth mur* 
der. 

have no such authority of God so to pill and poll as they
do, and to raise up taxes and gatherings to maintain their 
phantasies and to make war they wot not for what cause:
and therefore because the heads will not so rule, will they 
also no longer obey, but resist and rise against their evil 
heads, and one wicked destroyeth another. Yet is not 
God's word the cause of this, neither yet the preachere, 
for though that Christ himself taught all obedience, how 
that it is not lawful to resist wrong, (but for the officer that 
is appointed thereunto:) and how a man must love his very 
enemy, and pray for them that persecute him, and bless 
them that curse him: and how that all vengeance must be 
remitted to God, and that a man must forgive if he will be 
forgiven of God: yet the people, for the most part re-
ceived it not: they were ever ready to rise and to fight.
Forever when the scribes and pharisees went about to take 
Christ, they were afraid of the people: Not on the holy 
day said they (Matt. xxvi.) lest any rumour arise among 
the people: and (Matt. xxi.) They would have taken him 
but they feared the people: and (Luke xx.) Christ asked 
the Pharisees a question unto which they durst not answer,
lest the people should have stoned them. 

Last of all: forasmuch as the very disciples and apostles 
of Christ, after so long hearing of Christ's doctrine, were 
yet ready to fight for Christ clean against Christ's teaching:
as Peter (Matt. xxvi.) drew his sword, but he was rebuked:
and (Luke ix.) James and John would have had fire to 
come from heaven to consume the Samaritans, and to 
avenge the injury of Christ, but were likewise rebuked. If 
Christ's disciples were so long carnal, what wonder is it if 
we be not all perfect the first day? Yea, inasmuch as we 
be taught even of very babes, to kill a Turk, to slay a Jew, 
to burn an heretic, to fight for the liberties and right of 
the church, as they call it; yea, and inasmuch as we are 
brought in belief, if we shed the blood of our even chris- 
tian, or if the son shed the blood of his father that begat him, 
for the defence, not of the Pope's godhead only, but also 


Tyndale.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN, 
201

for whatsoever cause it be, yea, though it lie for no cause, 
but that his holiness commandeth it only, that we deserve 
as much as Christ deserved for us when he died on the 
cross; or if we be slain in the quarrel, that our souls go, 
nay even fly to heaven, and be there even before our blood 
be cold. Inasmuch I say as we have sucked in such bloody 
imaginations into the bottom of our hearts, even with our 
mother's milk, and have been so long hardened therein, 
what wonder were it, if, while we be yet young in Christ, 
we thought that it were lawful to fight for the true word of 
God? Yea, and though a man were thoroughly persuaded 
that it were not lawful to resist his king, though he would 
wrongfully take away life and goods; yet might be think 
that it were lawful to resist the hypocrites and to rise not 
against his king, but with his king to deliver his king, out 
of bondage and captivity, wherein the hypocrites hold him 
with wiles and falsehood, so that no man may be suffered 
to come at him, to tell him the truth. 

This seest thou, that it is the bloody doctrine of the pope, 
which caused disobedience, rebellion and insurrection, for 
he teacheth to fight and to defend his traditions, and what- 
soever he dreameth, with fire, water, and sword; and to dis- 
obey father, mother, master, lord, king, and emperor: yea, 
and to invade whatsoever land or nation that will not receive 
and admit his godhead. Where the peaceable doctrine of 
Christ teacheth to obey and to suffer for the word of God, 
and to remit the vengeance and the defence of the word to 
God, which is mighty and able to defend it: which also as 
soon as the word is once openly preached, and testified or 
witnessed, unto the world, and when he hath given them a 
season to repent, is ready at once to take vengeance of his 
enemies, and shooteth arrows with heads dipt in deadly 
poison at them; and poureth his plague from heaven down 
upon them; and sendeth the murrain and pestilence among 
them; and sinketh the cities of them; and maketh the earth 
swallow them, and compasseth them in their wiles, and 
taketh them in their own traps and snares, and casteth 

The pDp^^^i 
doctnne is 
bloody. 

Ch rial's 
doclnae is 
peace iiblf!« 

God ftven- 

gieth liis 
doctrine 
hiLuitelf. 


202
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[Tyndale.

Hoiv 1^ man 
ought to 
WUavc 
lni|iA«)f in 
reading of 
doctorff, 
ftnd ftl9o in 
the Scrip' 
tare. 

them into the pits which they digged for other men; and
sendeth them a dazing in the head; and utterly deatroyeth
them with their own subtle counsel.

Prepare thy mind therefore unto this little treatise, and 
read it discreetly, and judge it indifferently, and when I
allege any Scripture, look thou on the text whether I inter- 
pret it right: which thou shalt easily perceive, by the cir-
cunnstance and process of them; if thou make Christ the 
foundation and the ground, and build all on him, and re- 
ferest all to him; and findest also that the exposition 
agreeth unto the common articles of the faith, and open 
Scriptures. And God the Father of mercy, which for his 
truth's sake raised our Saviour Christ up again to justify 
us, give thee his Spirit to judge what is righteous in his 
eyes, and give thee strength to abide by it, and to main- 
tain it with all patience and long-suffering, unto the 
example and edifying of his congregation, and glory of his 
name. Amen. 


THE 
OBEDIENCE OF ALL DEGREES 
PROVED BY GOD'S WORD: AND FIRST OF CHILDREN 
UNTO THEIR ELDERS.

GOD (which worketh all in all things,) for a secret 
judgment and purpose, and for his godly pleasure, 
provided an hour that thy father and mother should come 
together, to make thee through them. He was present 
with thee in thy mother's womb, and fashioned thee 
and breathed life into thee; and, for the great love he had 
unto thee, provided milk in thy mother's breasts for thee 
against thou were born; moved also thy father and 
mother, and all other, to love thee, to pity thee, and to 
care for thee. 

And as he made thee through them, so hath he cast thee 
under the power and authority of them, to obey and serve 


TYNDALE.] 
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
503 

them in his stead; saying, Honour thy father and mother. 
(Exod. xx.) Which is not to be understood in bowing 
the knee, and putting off the cap only, but that thou love 
them with all thine heart; and fear and dread them, and 
wait on their commandments; and seek their worship,
pleasure, will and profit in all things; and give thy life for 
them, counting them worthy of all honour; remembering 
that thou art their good and possession, and that thou 
owest unto them thine own self, and all thou art able, yea, 
and more than thou art able to do.

Understand also, that whatsoever thou doest unto them 
(be it good or bad,) thou doest unto God. When thou 
pleasest them thou pleasest God; when thou displeasest 
them thou displeasest God; when they are angry with 
thee God is angry witii thee: neither is it possible for 
thee to come to the favour of God again (no, though 
all the angels of heaven pray for thee,) until thou have 
submitted thyself unto thy father and mother again. 

If thou obey, (though it be but carnally, either for fear,
for vain glory, or profit,) thy blessing shall be long life 
upon the earth. For he saith, Honour thy father and 
mother, that thou mayest live long upon the earth. (Exod. 
xx.) Contrariwise, if thou disobey them, thy life shall 
be shortened upon the earth. For it followeth, (Exod. xxi.) 
He that smiteth his father or mother shall be put to death 
for it. And he that curseth, (that is to say, raileth or dis- 
honoureth his father or mother with opprobrious words,) 
shall be slain for it. And (Deut. xxi.) if any man have 
a son stubborn and disobedient, which heareth not the 
voice of his father and the voice of his mother, so that 
they have taught him nurture, and he regardeth them not, 
then let his father and mother take him, and bring him 
forth unto the seniors or elders of the city, and unto the 
gate of the same place. And let them say unto the 
seniors of that city, This our son is stubborn and disobe- 
dient: he will not hearken unto our voice: he is a rioter 
and a drunkard. Then let the men of the city stone him 

<luT fiitlien 
t!»cr» are to 
be if* Gdril's* 

WhJil we 
cl(j in mir 
fatUers Am) 
iiiotUt-^r* 
tbdt wt! do 
to God, 

Tli43 revard 
of obe - 
dieace. 

The rcwArtl 
of ills- 
obedk'Qce, 


203
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[TVKPAJ.IC, 

rtb diio* 
bedience 

himself 
ttiougli the 
ufRf er will 

ROl. 

Marriage, 

Covetous- 
ii«sii rank- 
pth onr »pi- 
rittialty 
tljat tln'y 
cannot fti^e 
timt which 
a Turk h 

with stones unto death: so shall ye put away wickedness
from among you, and all Israel shall hear and shall fear. 

And though that the temporal officers (to their own 
damnation,) be negligent in punishing such disobedience, 
(as the spiritual officers are to teach it,) and wink at it, 
or look on it through the fingers, yet shall they not escape 
unpunished. For the vengeance of God shall accompany 
them (as thou mayest see Deut. xxviii.) with all misfor- 
tune and evil luck, and shall not depart from them until 
they be murdered, drowned, or hanged; either until by 
one mischance or another they be utterly brought to 
nought. Yea, and the world often times hangeth many a 
man for that they never deserved; but God hangeth them 
because they would not obey and hearken unto their 
elders, as the consciences of many will find when they 
come to the gallows. There can they preach and teach 
other that which they themselves would not learn in 
season. 

The marriage also of the children pertaineth unto their 
elders, as thou mayest see 1 Cor. vii. and throughout all 
the Scripture, by the authority of the said command- 
ment children obey father and mother. Which thing the 
heathen and Gentiles have ever kept, and to this day keep, 
to the great shame and rebuke of us Christians: inas- 
much as the weddings of our virgins (shame it is to speak 
it,) are more like to the salt of a bitch than the mar- 
rying of a reasonable creature. See not we daily three or 
four challenging one woman before the commissary or 
official, of which not one hath the consent of her father and 
mother? And yet he that hath most money hath best 
right, and shall have her in the despite of all her friends, 
and in defiance of God's ordinances. 

Moreover, when she is given by the judge unto the 
one party, and also married, even then ofttimes shall the 
contrary party sue for an higher judge, or another that 
succeedeth the same, and for money divorce her again. So 
shamefully doth the covetousness and ambition of our 


Tyndale.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 205 

prelates mock with the law of God. I pass over with 
silence how many years they will prolong the sentence 
with cavillations and subtlety, if they be well monied on
both parties; and if a damsel promise two, how shameful
counsel they will give the second, and also how the re-
ligious of Satan do separate unseparable matrimony. For
after thou art lawfully married at the commandment of 
father and mother, and with the consent of all thy friends;
yet if thou wilt be disguised like unto one of them, and
swear obedience to their traditions, thou mayest disobey
father and mother, break the oath which thou hast sworn
to God before his holy congregation, and withdraw love
and charity, the highest of God's commandments, and 
that duty and service which thou owest unto thy wife;
whereof Christ cannot dispense with thee. For Christ is 
not against God, but with God, and came not to break 
God's ordinances, but to fulfil them. That is, he came 
to overcome thee with kindness, and to make thee to do of 
very love the thing which the law compelleth thee to do. 
For love only, and to do service unto thy neighbour, is the 
fulfilling of the law in the sight of God. To be a monk 
or a friar, thou mayest thus forsake thy wife before thou 
hast lain with her, but not to be a secular priest. And
yet, after thou art professed, the Pope for money will dis-
pense with thee, both for thy coat and all thy obedience,
and make a secular priest of thee: likewise, as it is 
simony to sell a benefice, (as they call it,) but to resign 
upon a pension, and then to redeem the same, is no simony 
at all. Oh, crafty jugglers and mockers with the word
of God! 


206 
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[Tyndale.

THE OBEDIENCE OF WIVES UNTO THEIR
HUSBANDS.

Mftrrtage 
nJteretti 
the degree 
of njLturc. 

The lius* 
band is to 
tbo wife iti 

AFTER that Eve was deceived of the serpent, God said 
unto her, (Gen. iii.) Thy lust or appetite shall pertain 
unto thy husband, and he shall rule thee, or reign over
thee. God, which created the woman, knoweth what is
in that weak vessel, (as Peter calleth her,) and hath there- 
fore put her under the obedience of her husband, to rule her 
lusts and wanton appetites. Peter (1 Pet. iii.) exhorteth 
wives to be in subjection to their husbands; after the en- 
sample of the holy women which in old time trusted in 
God, and as Sarah obeyed Abraham and called him 
Lord. Which Sarah, before she was married, was
Abraham's sister, and equal with him; but as 
soon as she was married was in subjection, and became 
without comparison inferior. For so is the nature of 
wedlock by the ordinance of God. It were much better 
that our wives followed the ensample of the holy women of 
old time in obeying their husbands, than to worship them 
with a Paternoster, an Ave and a Credo, or to stick up 
candles before their images. Paul (Eph. v.) saith, Women, 
submit yourselves to your own husbands, as to the
Lord. For the husband is the wife's head, even as Christ is 
the head of the congregation. Therefore, as the congregation 
is in subjection to Christ, likewise let wives be in sub-
jection unto their husbands in all things. Let the woman, 
therefore, fear her husband, as Paul saith in the said place. 
For her husband is unto her in the stead of God, that she 
obey him, and wait on his commandments: and his com- 
mandments are God's commandments. If she, therefore, 
grudge against him, or resist him, she grudgeth against 
God, and resisteth God.


Tyndale.] 
A CHRISTIAN MAN, 
207 

THE OBEDIENCE OF SERVANTS UNTO THEIR 
MASTERS. 

SERVANTS, obey your carnal masters with fear and 
trembling, in singleness of your hearts as unto Christ;
not with service in the eye-sight as men pleasers, but as 
the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the 
heart, with good will, even as though ye served the Lord 
and not men. (Eph. vi.) And (1 Pet. ii.) Servants obey 
your masters with all fear, not only if they be good and 
courteous, but also though they be froward. For it cometh 
of grace, if a man for conscience toward God endure 
grief, suffering wrongfully. For what praise is it, if when 
ye be buffetted for your faults, ye take it patiently? But, 
and if ye do well, ye suffer wrong and take it patiently, 
then is there thanks with God. Hereunto, verily, were ye 
called. For Christ also suffered for our sakes, leaving us 
an ensample to follow his steps. In whatsoever kind, there- 
fore, thou art a servant, during the time of thy covenants, 
thy master is unto thee in the stead and room of God;
and God, through him, feedeth thee, clotheth thee, ruleth 
thee, and learneth thee. His commandments are God's 
commandments, and thou oughtest to obey him as God, 
and in all things to seek his pleasure and profit. For 
thou art his good and possession, as his ox or his horse;
insomuch that whosoever doth but desire thee in his heart 
from him, without his love and license, is condemned of 
God, which saith, (Exod. xx.) See thou once covet not 
thy neighbour's servants. 

Paul the apostle sent home Onesimus unto his master 
(as thou readest in the Epistle of Paul to Philemon:) 
insomuch that though the said Philemon with his servant 
also was converted by Paul, and owed to Paul, and 
to the word that Paul preached, not his servant only, but 
also himself; yea, and though that Paul was in necessity, 
and lacked ministers to minister unto him in the bonds 

In buffer* 
inp wron^ 
patient Ivt 
vre fuUow 
the Htcpa 
of ChritiC. 

Tlie (iiMtcr 
is unto tli« 
servant in 

Onr apiri- 
limtt^ np- 
tnin mpn^di 
(tervanU 
not tit lio- 
hsiur Gnd> 
li!it tlicir 
IrAditliinit 
nnd tcrc- 

i»iily» 


208 
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[TYNDALE.

CliriBl's 
doclnne 
and lEie 
Popi**s dif- 
fer. 

If thy miia- 
If r p1efi>.e 
ilwe not^ 
aliaire ihy- 
selfarootiki 
a friar* ur a 
pftesl, 

Ta obey 

tio man is 
u (tpirituui 
thing. 

which he suffered for the gospel's sake; yet would he not 
retain the servant necessary unto the furtherance of the 
gospel, without the consent of the master.

O how sore differeth the doctrine of Christ and his 
apostles, from the doctrine of the Pope and of his apos-
tles! For if any man will obey neither father nor 
mother, neither lord nor master, neither king nor prince, 
the same needeth but only to take the mark of the beast, 
that is, to shave himself a monk, a friar or a priest, and is 
then immediately free and exempted from all service and 
obedience due to man. He that will obey no man (as 
they will not) is most acceptable unto them. The more 
disobedient that thou art unto God's ordinances, the more 
apt and meet art thou for their's. Neither is the professing, 
vowing and swearing obedience unto their ordinances, any 
other thing than the defying, denying, and foreswearing 
obedience to the ordinances of God.

THE OBEDIENCE OF SUBJECTS UNTO KINGS, 
PRINCES, AND KULERS. 

Hom xiii. 

clioeen to 

suppre»i( 
ihe wicked 
and su|»* 
|Mirtth« 

LET every soul submit himself unto the authority of 
the higher powers. There is no power but of 
God: the powers that be, are ordained of God, Who- 
soever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordi- 
nance of God, They that resist shall receive to them- 
selves damnation. For rulers are not to be feared for 
good works, but for evil. Wilt thou be without fear of 
the power? Do well then, and so shalt thou be praised 
of the same: for he is the minister of God for thy


Tyndale.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 209 

wealth. But, and if thou do evil, then fear; for he 
beareth not a sword for nought: for he is the minister 
of God, to take vengeance on them that do evil. Where- 
fore ye must needs obey; not for fear of vengeance only, 
but also because of conscience. Even for this cause pay 
ye tribute: for they are God's ministers serving for the 
same purpose. 

Give to every man therefore his duty: tribute to whom 
tribute belongeth; custom to whom custom is due; fear 
to whom fear belongeth; honour to whom honour pertaineth. 
Owe nothing to any man; but to love one another: for 
he that loveth another fulfilleth the law. For these com- 
mandments, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt 
not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false wit- 
ness, Thou shalt not desire, and so forth; if there be any other 
commandment, are all comprehended in this saying, Love 
thine neighbour as thyself. Love hurteth not his neighbour:
therefore is love the fulfilling of the law. 

As a father over his children is both Lord and judge, 
forbidding one brother to avenge himself on another, but
(if any cause of strife be between them) will have it 
brought unto himself, or his assigns, to be judged and 
correct; so God forbiddeth all men to avenge them- 
selves, and taketh the authority and office of avenging unto 
himself; saying, Vengeance is mine, and I will reward. 
(Deut. xxxii.) Which text Paul allegeth, (Rom. xii.) 
For it is imposible that a man should be a righteous, an 
egal, or an indifferent judge in his own cause — lusts and 
appetites so blind us. Moreover when thou avengest 
thyself, thou makest not peace, but stirrest up more 
debate. 

God therefore hath given laws unto all nations, and in 
all lands hath put kings, governors, and rulers in his own 
stead, to rule the world through them. And hath com- 
manded all causes to be brought before them, as thou readest 
(Exod. xxii.) In all causes (saith he) of injury or wrong, 

VOL. II. P 

21O
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[TYNDALE.

Blearing. 

Curse. 

Cod rc- 

unrdinh all 

tliotjgh no 
mau eJse 
do. 

Co4 ireug^ 
«th nil dis- 
□brdknce 

though Qo 
mnn else 
do. 

whether it be ox, ass, sheep or vesture, or any lost thing 
which another challengeth, let the cause of both parties be 
brought unto the gods, whom the gods condemn, the 
same shall pay double unto his neighbour. Mark, the 
judges are called gods in the Scriptures, because they are 
in God's room, and execute the commandments of God. 
And in another place of the said chapter, Moses chargeth 
saying; See that thou rail not on the gods, neither speak 
evil of the ruler of thy people. Whosoever therefore re- 
sisteth them, resisteth God (for they are in the room of 
God) and they that resist shall receive the damnation. 

Such obedience unto father and mother, master, 
husband, emperor, king, lords and rulers, requireth God 
of all nations, yea of the very Turks and infidels. The 
blessing and reward of them that keep them, is the life of 
this world, as thou readest (Lev. xviii.) Keep my ordi- 
nances and laws; which if a man keep, he shall live 
therein. Which text Paid rehearseth Rom x. proving 
thereby that the righteousness of the law is but worldly, 
and the reward thereof is the life of this world. And the 
curse of them that breaketh them, is the loss of this life, 
as thou seest by their punishment appointed for them.

And whosoever keepeth the law (whether it be for fear, 
for vain glory or profit) though no man reward him, yet 
shall God bless him abundantly, and send him worldly 
prosperity, as thou readest Deut xxviii. What good 
blessings accompany the keeping of the law, and as we 
see the Turks far exceed us Christian men in worldly prospe-
rity for their just keeping of their temporal laws. Like- 
wise though no man punish the breakers of the law, yet 
shall God send his curses upon them till they be utterly 
brought to nought, as thou readest most terribly even in 
the said place.

Neither may the inferior person avenge himself upon 
the superior, or violently resist him for whatsoever wrong 
it be. If he do, he is condemned in the deed doing: 
inasmuch as he taketh upon him that which belongeth to 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
211

God only, which saith, Vengeance is mine, and I will re- 
ward. (Deut. xxxii.) And Christ saith (Mat. xxvi.) All 
they that take the sword shall perish with the sword. 
Takest thou a sword to avenge thyself? so givest thou not 
room unto God to avenge thee, but robbest him of his 
most high honour, in that thou wilt not let him be judge 
over thee. 

If any man might have avenged himself upon his su- 
perior, that might David most righteounly have done upon
king Saul which so wrongfully persecuted David; even 
for no other cause, than that God had anointed him king, 
and promised him the kingdom. Yet when God had de- 
livered Saul into the hands of David, that he might have 
done what he would with him as thou seest in the first book 
of Kings the xxivth chapter, how Saul came into the camp 
where David was. And David came to him secretly, and 
cut off a piece of his garment. And as soon as he had 
done it his heart smote him, because he had done so much 
unto his lord. And when his men couraged him to slay 
him, he answered. The Lord forbid it me that I should 
lay mine hand on him. Neither suffered he his men to 
hurt him. When Saul was gone out, David followed and 
shewed him the piece of his garment, and said, Why be- 
lievest thou the words of men that say, David goeth about 
to do thee harm? perceive and see that there is neither 
evil nor wickedness in my hand, and that I have not tres- 
passed against thee, and yet thou layest await for my life, 
God judge between thee and me, and avenge me of thee, 
but mine hand be not upon thee. As the old proverb saith 
(said David) Out of the wicked shall wickedness proceed, 
but mine hand be not upon thee, meaning that God ever 
punisheth one wicked by another. And again (said David,) 
God be judge, and judge between thee and me, and 
behold and plead my cause, and give me judgment or right 
of thee. 

And in the xxvith chapter of the same book, when Saul 
persecuted David again, David came to Saul by night, 

f)iivid. 

CoH de- 
stroy ctb 
Ode vrickfd 
by aootber. 


212
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[TYNDALE.

God pre*- 
rideUi n 

to lake th£ 
evil out of 
tUe wfty 
wbcn tiicy 
have (uU 
BLIdd lijcir 
wicked* 

p 

^Tjy David 
view dot 

SituL 

The kiog b 

in llie roam 
of God in 
Hue worlds 

Tlie kiDf 
muBt be rc- 
Bprvct) unto 
tbe ren- 
^enuce of 
God. 

as he slept and all his men, and took away his spear and a 
cup of water from his head. Then said Abishai, David's
servant, God hath delivered thee thine enemy into thine 
hand this day, let me now therefore nail him to the ground 
with my spear, and give him but even one stripe and no 
more. David forbad him saying, Kill him not, for who 
(said he) shall lay hands on the Lord's anointed and be 
not guilty? The Lord liveth or by the Lord's life (said he) 
he dieth not, except the Lord smite him, or that his day be 
come to die, or else go to battle and there perish.

Why did not David slay Saul, seeing he was so wicked,
not in persecuting David only, but in disobeying God's
commandments, and in that he had slain eighty-five of 
God's priests wrongfully? Verily for it was not lawful:
for if he had done it, he must have sinned against God:
for God hath made the king in every realm judge over 
all, and over him is there no judge. He that judgeth the 
king judgeth God, and he that layeth hands on the king, 
layeth hand on God, and he that resisteth the king resisteth
God, and damneth God's law and ordinance. If the 
subjects sin they must be brought to the king's judgment. 
If the king sin he must be reserved to the judgment, 
wrath, and vengeance of God. And as it is to resist the 
king, so is it to resist his officer, which is set or sent to 
execute the king's commandment. 

And in the first chapter of the second book of Kings, 
David commanded the young man to be slain which 
brought unto him the crown and bracelet of Saul, and said 
to please David withal, that he himself had slain Saul.
And in the fourth chapter of the same book, David com- 
manded those two to be slain which brought unto him the 
head of Ishbosheth, Saul's son, by whose means yet the
whole kingdom returned unto David, according imto the 
promise of God.

And Luke xiiith, when they showed Christ of the
Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their own 
sacrifice, he answered, Suppose ye that these Galileans 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
213

were sinners above all other Galileans, because they suf- 
fered such punishment? I tell you nay, but except ye 
repent, ye shall likewise perish. This was told Christ, 
no doubt, of such an intent as they asked him, (Matt.
xxii.) Whether it were lawful to give tribute unto Caesar?
For they thought that it was no sin to resist an heathen 
prince: as few of us would think, if we were under the 
Turk, that it were sin to rise against him, and to rid our- 
selves from under his dominions, so sore have our bishops 
robbed us of the true doctrine of Christ. But Christ 
condemned their deeds, and also the secret thoughts of 
all other, that consented there unto, saying: Except ye 
repent, ye shall likewise perish. As who should say, I 
know that ye are within in your hearts, such as they were 
outward in their deeds, and are under the same damnation:
except, therefore, ye repent, betimes, ye shall break out 
at the last into like deeds, and likewise perish, as it came 
afterward to pass. 

Hereby seest thou that the king is in this world without 
law, and may at his lust do right or wrong, and shall give 
accounts, but to God only. 

Another conclusion is this, that no person, neither any 
degree may be exempt from this ordinance of God. Nei- 
can the profession of monks and friars, or any thing that 
the pope or bishops can lay for themselves, except them
from the sword of the emperor or kings, if they break 
the laws. For it is written, let every soul submit himself 
unto the authority of the higher powers. Here is no man 
except, but all souls must obey. The higher powers are 
the temporal kings and princes, unto whom God hath 
given the sword to punish whosoever sinneth. God hath 
not given them swords to punish one, and to let another 
go free, and sin unpunished. Moreover, with what face 
durst the spiritualty, which ought to be the light and an 
ensample of good living unto all other, desire to sin un- 
punished, or to be excepted from tribute, toll, or custom, 
that they would not bear pain with their brethren to 

It IK nttt 
liiwful for 

rcjtiit bifl 
thoiigli H^ 

Kings must 
make Re- 
count of 
thetrdomg 
onlv U> 
God. 

The kinff 

llHttl QQ 

power but 
tci his 
dnmnittinii 
to privilege 
the spirUit- 
nlty to ijiu 
iiiipu- 


214
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

P 

h king it a 
great be- 

Iboiigfa lie 
be nev^er bo 
«t1(. 

the maintenance of kings and officers ordained of God to 
punish sin? There is no power but of God (by power 
understand the authority of kings and princes.) The 
powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever, there- 
fore, resisteth power, resisteth God: yea, though he be 
pope, bishop, monk, or friar. They that resist shall 
receive unto themselves damnation. Why? For God's 
word is against them, which will have all men under the 
power of the temporal sword: for rulers are not to 
be feared for good works, but for evil. Hereby seest 
thou that they that resist the powers, or seek to be exempt 
from their authority, have evil consciences, and seek liberty 
to sin unpunished, and to be from bearing pain with 
their brethren. Wilt thou be without fear of the power?
So do well, and thou shall have laud of the same (that is 
to say of the ruler.) With good living ought the spiritualty 
to rid themselves from fear of the temporal sword, and 
not with craft and with blinding the kings, and bringing the 
vengeance of God upon them, and in purchasing license 
to sin unpunished. 

For he is the minister of God for thy wealth: to defend 
thee from a thousand inconveniences, from thieves, mur- 
derers, and them that would defile thy wife, thy daughter, 
and take from thee all that thou hast: yea, life and all, 
if thou didst resist. Furthermore, though he be the 
greatest tyrant in the world, yet is he unto thee a great 
benefit of God, and a thing wherefore thou oughtest to 
thank God highly. For it is betler to have somewhat 
than to be clean stript out of altogether: it is better 
to pay the tenth than to lose all: it is better to 
suffer one tyrant than many, and to suffer wrong of one 
than of every man. Yea, and it is better to have a tyrant 
unto thy king than a shadow, a passive king that doth 
nought himself, but suffer others to do with him what they 
will, and to lead him whither they list. For a tyrant 
though he do wrong unto the good, yet he punisheth the 
evil, and maketh all men obey, neither suffereth any man 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
215

to poll but himself only. A king that is soft as silk and 
effeminate, that is to say, turned into the nature of a 
woman, what with his own lusts, which are as the longing 
of a woman with child, so that he cannot resist them, and 
what with the wily tyranny of them that ever rule him, shall 
be much more grievous unto the realm than a right tyrant. 
Read the Chronicles, and thou shalt find it ever so.

But and if thou do evil, then fear; for he beareth not 
a sword for nought: for he is the minister of God, to 
take vengeance on them that do evil. If the office of 
princes given them of God be to take vengeance of evil 
doers: then by this text and God's word, are all princes 
damned, even as many as give liberty or license unto the 
spiritualty to sin unpunished: and not only to sin un- 
punished themselves; but also to open sanctuaries, pri- 
vileged places, churchyards, St. John's hold: yea, and if 
they come too short unto all these, yet to set forth a neck- 
verse to save all manner [of] trespassers from the fear of the 
sword of the vengeance of God put in the hands of princes 
to take vengeance on all such. 

Priaces nre 
ordftloed to 

dolors. 

The diim* 
DAtion of 
princes. 

Siif^ctiiii- 
rieiu 

Neck* 
verse. 

God requireth the law to be kept of all men, let them
keep it for whatsoever purpose they will. Will they not 
keep the law? so vouchsafeth he not that they enjoy this
temporal life. Now are there three natures of men; one 
altogether beastly; which in no-wise receive the law in 
their hearts, but rise against princes and rulers whensoever 
they are able to make their party good. These are sig- 
nified by them that worshipped the golden calf. For 
Moses brake the tables of the law ere he came at 
them.

The second are not so beastly, but receive the law, and 
unto them the law cometh; but they look not Moses in 
the face. For his countenance is too bright for them;
that is, they understand not that the law is spiritual, and 
requireth the heart. They look on the pleasure, profit, 
and promotion that followeth the keeping of the law, and 

Three nfc- 
turw. 

Wluii ii h 

to Look 
Moifies m 

th« face. 


216 
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[TYNDALE. 

CbthU 

A Cbrii- 
tian msD 
Bceketb no 
m^Tt but 

Luiti^ 

in respect of the reward keep they the law outwardly with 
works, but not in the heart. For if they might obtain 
like honour, glory, promotion and dignity, and also avoid 
all inconveniences, if they broke the law, so would they 
also break the law, and follow their lusts. 

The third are spiritual, and look Moses in the open face,
and are (as Paul saith Romans ii.) a law unto themselves,
and have the law written in their hearts by the spirit of 
God. These need neither of king nor officers to drive 
them, neither that any man proffer them any reward for 
to keep the law. For they do it naturally.

The first work for fear of the sword only. The second 
for reward. The third work for love freely. They look 
on the exceeding mercy, love and kindness which God 
hath showed them in Christ, and therefore love again and 
work freely. Heaven they take of the free-gift of God 
through Christ's deservings, and hope without all manner 
[of] doubting that God, according to his promise, will in this 
world also defend them, and do all things for them of his 
goodness, and for Christ's sake, and not for any goodness 
that is in them. They consent unto the law that it is 
holy and just, and that all men ought to do whatsoever 
God commandeth for no other cause, but because God 
commandeth it. And their great sorrow is, because that 
there is no strength in their members to do that which 
their heart lusteth to do, and is athirst to do. 

These of the last sort keep the law of their own ac- 
cord, and that in the heart, and have professed perpetual 
war against the lusts and appetites of the flesh, till they 
be utterly subdued; yet not through their own strength, 
but knowing and knowledging their weakness, cry ever 
for strength to God, which hath promised assistance 
unto all that call upon him. These follow God, and are 
led of his Spirit. The other two are led of lusts and ap- 
petites.

Lusts and appetites are divers and many, and that in 
one man: yea, and one lust contrary to another, and the 

I 

I 

4 

I 

4 

4 


Tyndale.] 
A CHRISTIAN MAN. 
217 

greatest lust carrieth a man altogether away with him. 
We are also changed from one lust to another. Other- 
wise are we disposed when we are children; otherwise 
when we are young men; and otherwise when we are old;
otherwise over even; and otherwise in the morning: yea, 
sometimes, altered six times in an hour. How fortuneth 
all this? Because that the will of man followeth the wit,
and is subject unto the wit, and as the wit erreth, so does 
the will, and as the wit is in captivity, so is the will; 
neither is it possible that the will should be free where the 
wit is in bondage. 

That thou mayest perceive and feel the thing in thine 
heart, and not be a vain sophister, disputing about words 
without perceiving; mark this. The root of all evil, the 
greatest damnation and most terrible wrath and vengeance 
of God that we are in, is natural blindness. We are all 
out of the right way, every man his ways: one judgeth 
this best, and another that to be best. Now is worldly
wit nothing else but craft and subtlety to obtain that which 
we judge, falsely, to be best. As I err in my wit, so err I
in my will. When I judge that to be evil which indeed
is good, then hate I that which is good. And when I 
suppose that good which is evil indeed, then love I evil. 
As if I be persuaded and borne in hand that my most 
friend is mine enemy, then hate I my best friend: and if 
I be brought in belief that my most enemy is my friend, 
then love I my most enemy. Now when we say, every 
man hath his free-will, to do what him lusteth, I say, 
verily, that men do what they lust. Notwithstanding, to 
follow lusts is not freedom, but captivity and bondage. 
If God open any man's wits to make him feel in his heart, 
that lusts and appetites are damnable, and give him power 
to hate and resist them, then is he free, even with the 
freedom wherewith Christ maketh free, and hath power 
to do the will of God. 

Thou mayest hereby perceive that all that is done in the
world (before the Spirit of God come, and giveth us light) 


218
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[Tyndale.

tluil sprin- 
geih not oi 
the Spirit 
of God, 

AQd fiH thnt 
is not danf 
in the hgUt 
i*f God' a 
word , 

So flo our 

sptriliiitlty 
in aU tbcir 
wurks. 

True mira- 
cli;» are 
wrought to 
coalirm the 
preAcbiicijjr* 
find not the 
Godlicud df 
tbe 
preicbcr* 

is damnable sin, and the more glorious the more damnable;
so that, that which the world counteth most glorious, is 
more damnable in the sight of God, than that which the 
whore, the thief, and the murderer do. With blind reasons 
of worldly wisdom mayest thou change the minds of youths,
and make them give themselves to what thou wilt either for 
fear, for praise, or for profit, and yet doest but change 
them from one vice to another. As the persuasions of 
her friends made Lucrece chaste. Lucrece believed if 
she were a good housewife and chaste, that she should be 
most glorious, and that all the world would give her 
honour, and praise her. She sought her own glory in her 
chastity, and not God's. When she had lost her chastity, 
then counted she herself most abominable in the sight of 
all men, and for very pain and thought which she had, 
not that she had displeased God, but that she had lost her 
honour, slew herself. Look how great her pain and sor- 
row was for the loss of her chastity, so great was her glory 
and rejoicing therein, and so much despised she them that 
were otherwise, and pitied them not; which pride God 
more abhorreth than the whoredom of any whore. Of 
like pride are all the moral virtues of Aristotle, Plato, 
and Socrates, and all the doctrine of the philosophers the 
very gods of our school-men. 

In like manner is it for the most part of our most holy 
religion. For they of like imagination do things which 
they of Bedlam may see, that they are but madness. 
They look on the miracles which God did by the saints to 
move the unbelieving unto the faith, and to confirm the 
truth of his promises in Christ, whereby all that believe 
are made saints: as thou seest in the last chapter of Mark. 
They preached (saith he) every where, the Lord working 
with them, and confirming their preaching with miracles 
that followed. And in the fourth of the Acts, the dis- 
ciples prayed that God would stretch forth his hands to 
do miracles and wonders in the name of Jesus. And 
Paul (1 Cor. xiii.) saith, that the miracle of speaking 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
219

with divers tongues is but a sign for unbelievers, and not 
for them that believe. These miracles turn they to an- 
other purpose, saying in their blind hearts, see what mi- 
racles God hath showed for this saint, he must be verily 
great with God! And at once turn themselves from God's 
word, and put their trust and confidence in the saint and 
his merits, and make an advocate, or rather a God of the 
saint; and of their blind imagination make a testament or 
bond between the saint and them; the testament of Christ's 
blood clean forgotten. They look on the saints' garments 
and lives, or rather lies, which men lie on the saints:
and this wise imagine in their hearts, saying, The saint for
wearing such a garment, and for such deeds, is become 
so glorious in heaven. If I do likewise, so shall I be 
also. They see not the faith and trust which the saints had
in Christ, neither the word of God which the saints 
preached; neither the intent of the saints, how that the 
saints did such things, to tame their bodies, and to be an 
ensample to the world, and to teach that such things are 
to be despised which the world most wondereth at and mag- 
nified. They see not also that some lands are so hot 
that a man can neither drink wine nor eat flesh therein:
neither consider they the complexion of the saints, and a 
thousand like things see they not. So when they have 
killed their bodies, and brought them in that case, that 
scarce with any restorative they can recover their health
again, yet had they lever die than to eat flesh. Why?
for they think, I have now this twenty, thirty, or forty 
years eaten no flesh, and have obtained, I doubt not, by 
this time as high a room as the best of them: should 
I now lose that? nay, I had lever die: and as Lucretia 
had lever have been slain, if he had not been too strong for 
her, than to have lost her glory, even so had these. They 
ascribe heaven unto their imaginations and mad inventions,
and receive it not of the liberality of God, by the merits 
and deservings of Christ. 

He now that is renewed in Christ, keepeth the law 

Our hypo- 
laiiiU. 

1 Ur r«U- 
upon the 
only 

The spiri- 
ivkd man- 


220
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

HiejiBtiiml 

tUHtl* 

last fu- 

Kings de- 
fend the 
fnl«e ftu- 
tbority of 
the pope, 
their iifficc- 

of sin Uid 

mmbter 
the kia|:*j$ 
dmlf , ibeir 
own laid 
*p«rt ; yea. 
they ptr- 
seeute their 
own office. 

Kings do 
but wait 
on ihc 
Piipe'$ 

pteMure* 

The ju^- 
gUng of 
th« Pope* 

Bbhopi of 

Almmay. 

without any law written, or compulsion of any ruler or 
officer, save by the leading of the Spirit only: but the 
natural man is enticed and moved to keep the law carnally,
with carnal reasons and worldly persuasions, as for glory,
honour, riches and dignity. But the last remedy of all, 
when all other fail, is fear. Beat one, and the rest will 
abstain for fear: as Moses ever putteth in remembrance, 
saying, Kill, stone, burn. So shall thou put evil from 
thee, and all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall no more 
do so. If fear help not, then will God that they be taken 
out of this life. 

Kings were ordained then, as I before said, and the 
sword put in their hands, to take vengeance of evil doers,
that other might fear: and were not ordained to fight one 
against another, or to rise against the emperor to defend 
the false authority of the pope, that very antichrist. Bi- 
shops they only can minister the temporal sword: their 
office, the preaching of God's word, laid apart, which they 
will neither do, nor suffer any man to do, but slay with the 
temporal sword (which they have gotten out of the hand 
of all princes) them that would. The preaching of God's 
word is hateful and contrary unto them: why? For it is 
impossible to preach Christ, except thou preach against 
antichrist; that is to say, them which, with their false doc- 
trine and violence of sword, enforce to quench the true 
doctrine of Christ. And as thou canst heal no disease,
except thou begin at the root: even so canst thou preach 
against no mischief, except thou begin at the bishops. 
Kings they are but shadows, vain names and things idle, 
having nothing to do in the world, but when our holy
father needeth their help. 

The Pope contrary unto all conscience and against all 
the doctrine of Christ, which saith, My kingdom is not of 
this world, (John xviii.) hath usurped the right of the Em- 
peror. And by policy of the bishops of Almany, and 
with corrupting the electors or choosers of the Emperor 
with money, bringeth to pass that such a one is ever chosen 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
221

Emperor that is not able to make his party good with the 
Pope. To stop the Emperor that he come not at Rome,
he bringeth the French King up to Milan, and on the 
other side bringeth he the Venetians. If the Venetians 
come too nigh, the bishops of France must bring in the 
French King. And the Socheners are called and sent for 
to come and succour. And for their labour he giveth to 
some a rose, to another a cap of maintenance. One is 
called most Christian King, another Defender of the faith;
another the eldest son of the most holy seat. He blaseth 
also the arms of other, and putteth in the holy cross, the 
crown of thorn, or the nails, and so forth. If the French 
king go too high, and creep up either to Bononia or 
Naples: then must our English bishops bring in our king. 
The craft of the bishops is to entitle one king with another's 
realm. He is called king of Denmark and of England;
he king of England and of France. Then to blind the lords 
and the commons, the king must challenge his right. Then 
must the land be taxed and every man pay, and the treasure 
borne out of the realm and the land beggared. How many a 
thousand men's lives hath it cost? And how many an hun- 
dred thousand pounds hath it carried out of the realm in our 
remembrance? Besides how abominable an example of 
gathering was there; such verily as never tyrant since the 
world began did, yea such as was never before heard or 
thought on, neither among Jews, Saracens, Turks, or 
heathen, since God created the sun to shine; that a beast 
should break up into the temple of God, that is to say, 
into the heart and consciences of men, and compel them 
to swear every man what he was worth, to lend that should 
never be paid again. How many thousands forswear 
themselves! How many thousands set themselves above 
their ability, partly for fear lest they should be forsworn 
and partly to save their credence! When the pope hath 
his purpose, then is peace made, no man wotteth how, 
and our most enemy is our most friend.

Now because the Emperor is able to obtain his right, 

MiU 

Biiiliopj {if 

A c&i* of 

Defender 
of cbt* 
Pope's 

Till- eUf^t 
son of tUe 
holy scat. 
Il!»^mg oi 

The En- 
glish Bi- 

The fttUe- 
hnod of the 

O Q cnicl 
mid nn nW* 
minnhle 

of tyrants i 
judge theoi 
h)^ iheir 
decd^i tnJth 
ChriiJt, 


222
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[Tyndale.

Tbc wliore 

French, English, Venetians and all must upon him. O 
great whore of Babylon, how abuseth she the princes of 
the world, how drunk hath she made them with her wine!
How shameful licenses doth she give them, to use necro- 
mancy, to hold whores, to divorce themselves, to break the 
faith and promises that one maketh with another; that the 
confessors shall deliver unto the king the confession of 
whom he will, and dispenseth with them even of the very 
law of God, which Christ himself cannot do. 

I 

AGAINST THE POPE'S FALSE POWER. 

Ktyi Peter 
orilyf Jiiit 
Clirbt niso 

WHM under 
Uie teinfM>- 
rttl sward. 

TJie king! 
Biu ill giv* 
iog eiccp- 
ttoEiB, and 
lltr prelates 
in reretving 
tiietn^ 

CHRIST saith unto Peter, put up thy sword into his sheath. 
For all that lay hand upon the sword shall perish with 
the sword, (Matthew xxvi.) That is, whosoever without the 
commandment of the temporal officer, to whom God hath 
given the sword, layeth hand on the sword to take vengeance,
the same deserveth death in the deed doing. God did 
not put Peter only under the temporal sword, but also
Christ himself. As it appeareth in the fourth chapter to
the Galatians. And Christ saith (Mat. iii.) Thus be-
cometh it us to fulfil all righteousness, that is to say, all 
ordinances of God. If the head be then under the tem- 
poral sword, how can the members be excepted? If 
Peter sinned in defending Christ against the temporal 
sword (whose authority and ministers the bishops then 
abused against Christ as ours do now) who can excuse our 
prelates of sin which will obey no man, neither king nor 
emperor? Yea, who can excuse from sin, either the kings 
that give, either the bishops that receive such exemptions 
contrary to God's ordinances, and Christ's doctrine? 

And Mat. xviith, both Christ and also Peter pay tribute, 
where the meaning of Christ's question unto Peter is, if 
princes take tribute of strangers only and not of their 

4 


TYNDALE.] 
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
223 

children, then verily ought I to be free which am the Son 
of God, whose servants and ministers they are, and of 
whom they have their authority. Yet because they neither 
knew that, neither Christ came to use that authority, but 
to be our servant, and to bear our burden, and to obey all 
ordinances, both in right and wrong for our sakes and to 
teach us; therefore said he to St. Peter, Pay for thee and 
me lest we offend them. Moreover though that Christ 
and Peter (because they were poor) might have escaped, 
yet would he not for fear of offending other and hurting 
their consciences. For he might well have given occasion 
unto the tribute gatherers to have judged amiss both of 
him and his doctrine; yea, and the Jews might happly 
have been offended thereby, and have thought that it had 
not been lawful for them to have paid tribute unto heathen 
princes and idolaters, seeing that he so great a prophet 
paid not. Yea, and what other thing causeth the lay 
so little to regard their princes, as that they see them both 
despised and disobeyed of the spiritualty? But our pre- 
lates which care for none offending of consciences and less
for God's ordinances, will pay nought: but when princes
must fight in our most holy father's quarrel, and against
Christ. Then are they the first. There also is none so 
poor that then hath not somewhat to give.

Mark here, how past all shame our school doctors are, 
(as Rochester is in his sermon against Martin Luther) 
which, of this text of Matthew, dispute, that Peter, because
he paid tribute, is greater than the other apostles, and hath
more authority and power than they, and was head unto 
them all: contrary unto so many clear texts, where Christ 
rebuketh them: saying That is an heathenish thing that one 
should climb above another, or desire to be greater. To be 
great in the kingdom of heaven is to be a servant, and he 
that most humbleth himself, and becometh a servant to 
other (after the ensample of Christ, I mean, and his apostles, 
and not of the Pope and his apostles, our cardinals and 
bishops,) the same is greatest in that kingdom. If Peter 


224
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[TYNDALE. 

Tliey make 
no con* 
science »t 
any e^'il 
doing-. 

Thry rare 
for their 
neifchbour 
ttK tht; wolf 
doth for 
the sbcep. 

The evU 
ensaw|ile 

of the spi- 
ritualty 
causclh the 
Uy to Iw- 
Jie\-e tbat 
tliey arc 
not bound 
to obey. 

There is uo 
Cbmtmti 
lore in 
Ihcm. 

in paying tribute became greatest, how cometh it, that they 
will pay none at all? But to pay tribute is a sign of sub- 
jection verily; and the causae why Christ payed was because 
he had an household, and for the same cause payed Peter 
also. For he had an house, a ship and nets, as thou readest 
in the gospel. But let us go to Paul again. 

Wherefore ye must needs obey, not for fear of veangeance 
only, but also because of conscience. That is, though 
thou be so naughty (as now many years our Pope and 
prelates every where are) that thou needest not to obey the 
temporal sword for fear of vengeance: yet must thou obey 
because of conscience. First, because of thine own con- 
science. For though thou be able to resist, yet shalt thou 
never have a good conscience, as long as God's word, law,
and ordinance, are against thee. Secondarily, for thy 
neighbour's conscience. For though through craft and 
violence thou mightest escape, and obtain liberty or pri- 
vilege to be free from all manner [of] duties: yet oughtest 
thou neither to sue or to seek for any such thing; neither 
yet admit or accept, if it were proffered, lest thy freedom 
make thy weak brother to grudge and rebel, in that he 
seeth thee go empty, and he himself more laden, thy part 
also laid on his shoulders. Seest thou not if a man favour 
one son more than another, or one servant more than 
another, how all the rest grudge, and how love, peace, and 
unity is broken? What Christianly love is in thee to thy 
neighbour ward, when thou canst find in thy heart to go 
up and down empty by him all day long, and see him over 
charged, yea, to fall under his burden, and yet wilt not 
once set to thine hand to help him? What good conscience 
can there be among our spiritualty, to gather so great 
treasure together, and with hypocrisy of their false learning 
to rob almost every man of house and lands, and yet not 
therewith content, but with all craft and wiliness to purchase 
so great liberties and exemptions from all manner [of] bearing 
with their brethren, seeking in Christ nothing but lucre?
I pass over with silence how they teach princes in every 


Tyndale.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
225 

land, to lade new exactions and tyranny on their subjects 
more and more daily, neither for what purpose they do it 
say I. God I trust shall shortly disclose their juggling, 
and bring their falseliood to light; and lay a medicine to 
them, to make their scabs break out. Nevertheless this I 
say, that they have robbed all realms, not of God's word 
only; but also of all wealth and prosperity, and have driven 
peace out of all lands, and withdrawn themselves from all 
obedience to princes, and have separated themselves from 
the lay men, counting them viler than dogs; and have set 
up the whore of Babylon, antichrist of Rome, whom they 
call Pope, and have conspired against all common-wealths, 
and have made them a several kingdom, wherein it is 
lawful, unpunished, to work all abomination. In every 
parish have they spies, and in every great man's house, and 
in every tavern and alehouse. And through confessions 
know they all secrets, so that no man may open his mouth 
to rebuke whatsoever they do, but that he shall be shortly 
made an heretic. In all councils is one of them, yea the 
most part and chief rulers of the councils are of them:
but of their council is no man. 

Even for this cause pay ye tribute, that is to wit, for con- 
science' sake to thy neighbour, and for the cause that fol- 
loweth. For they are God's ministers serving for the same 
purpose. Because God will so have it, we must obey. 
We do not look (if we have Christ's Spirit in us) what is 
good, profitable, glorious and honourable for us, neither 
on our own will, but on God's will only. Give to every 
man therefore his duty; tribute to whom tribute belongeth;
custom to whom custom is due; fear to whom fear be- 
longeth; honour to whom honour pertaineth. 

That thou mightest feel the working of the spirit of 
God in thee, and lest the beauty of the deed should de- 
ceive thee, and make thee think that the law of God, 
which is spiritual, were content and fulfilled with the out- 
ward and bodily deed it followeth. Owe nothing to any 
man, but to love one another: for he that loveth an- 

VOL. II. Q 

Whiil pur- 
pose ? evtn 
to flHtlFr 

Unit they 
rnuy abuse 
tbetr AQ* 
tlioritv to 
*l(iywli08O- 
ei-er ht- 
llcvetb m 
ChrUt« mill 
to maiiiiHiii 
tlic Uope. 

Confenitoii, 

know k\\ 

crets mid 
no mnu 

LoFC fulfiS- 
ktli ilic 
Uw hi? fore 
Oud Kfid 
nut tWaiit- 
Wikvd deed. 


226
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[Tyndale.

The deed 
ful&Ui-tli 
the Inw be< 
fore the 
world. 

Faith 
mnkclh ft 
nutn lo 
lore. 

Jik»tifyliig> 

The t>flSce 
or dtiijr 
of tfieltmr. 

other fulfilleth the law. For these commandments, Thou 
shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not kill, thou shalt 
not steal, thou shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt not 
desire, and so forth, if there be any other commandment,
are all comprehended or contained in this saying, Love 
thy neighbour: therefore is love the fulfilling of the law. 
Here hast thou sufficient against all the sophisters work- 
holy aud justifiers in the world, which so magnify their 
deeds. The law is spiritual, and requireth the heart, and 
is never fulfilled with the deed in the sight of God. With 
the deed thou fulfillest the law before the world, and 
livest thereby, that is, thou enjoyest this present life, and 
avoidest the wrath and vengeance, the death and punish- 
ment which the law threateneth to them that break it. 
But before God thou keepest the law if thou love only. 
Now what shall make us love? Verily that shall faith 
do. If thou behold how much God loveth thee in Christ, 
and from what vengeance he hath delivered thee for his 
sake, and of what kingdom he hath made thee here, then 
shalt thou see cause enough to love thy very enemy with- 
out respect of reward, either in this life or in the life to 
come; but because that God will so have it, and Christ 
hath deserved it, yet thou shouldest feel in thine heart 
that all thy deeds to come are abundantly recompensed 
already in Christ. 

Thou wilt say haply, If love fulfil the law, then it jus- 
tifieth. I say that that wherewith a man fulfilleth the 
law declareth him justified; but that which giveth him 
wherewith to fulfil the law justifieth him. By justifying, 
understand the forgiveness of sins, and the favour of God.
Now saith the text, (Rom. x.) the end of the law, or the 
cause wherefore the law was made, is Christ, to justify 
all that believe. That is, the law is given to utter sin, to 
kill the consciences, to damn our deeds, to bring to re- 
pentance, and to drive unto Christ: in whom God hath 
promised his favour and forgiveness of sin unto all that 
repent and consent to the law that it is good. If thou be- 

P 


Tyndale.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN. 
227 

lieve the promises, then doth God's truth justify thee;
that is, forgiveth thee, and receiveth thee to favour for 
Christ's sake. In a surety whereof, and to certify thine 
heart, he sealeth thee with the Spirit. (Eph. i. and iv.) And, 
(2 Cor. V.) saith Paul; Which gave us his Spirit in earnest. 
Now the Spirit is given us through Christ. (Read the 
viiith chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and Gal. iii. 
and 2 Cor. iii.) Nevertheless the Spirit, and his fruits, 
wherewith the heart is purified, as faith, hope, love, pa- 
tience, long-suffering and obedience, could never be 
seen without outward experience. For if thou were not 
brought sometime into cumbrance, whence God only 
could deliver thee, thou shouldest never see thy faith, yea, 
except thou foughtest sometime against desperation, hell, 
death, sin, and powers of this world, for thy faith's 
sake, thou shouldest never know true faith from a 
dream. Except thy brother now and then offended thee, 
thou couldest not know whether thy love were godly. 
For a Turk is not angry till he be hurt and offended;
but if thou love him that doth thee evil, then is thy 
love of God: likewise if thy rulers were alway kind, thou 
shouldest not know whether thine obedience were pure 
or no; but and if thou canst patiently obey evil rulers in 
all things that is not to the dishonour of God, and when 
thou hurtest not thy neighbours, then art thou sure that 
God's spirit worketh in thee, and that thy faith is no dream, 
nor any false imagination. 

Therefore counselleth Paul, (Rom. xii.) Recompense 
to no man evil. And on your part have peace with all 
men. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but give 
room unto the wrath of God. For it is written. Ven- 
geance is mine, and I will reward, saith the Lord. There- 
fore, if thy enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give 
him drink. For in so doing, thou shalt heap coals of fire 
on his head (that is, thou shalt kindle love in him.) Be 
not overcome of evil (that is, let not another man's wick- 
edness make thee wicked also.) But overcome evil with 
Q 2 

Tlic bc- 
Hering of 
God's pro- 
mises justi- 
fietb. 

Tbc Spirit 
nnd tlie 
invrard vir- 
tues are 
known by 
the out- 
ward deed. 

Overcome 
thine ene- 
my with 
well-doing. 


228
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[TYNDALE.

good, that is, with softness, kindness, and all patience 
win him; even as God with kindness won thee.

TbeUw. 

T\ie kmg. 

Ciud'9 gift* 

Why the 

rulers arc 

The law was given in thunder, Lightning, fire, smoke, 
and the noise of a trumpet and terrible sight. (Exod. xx.)
So that the people quaked for fear, and stood afar off,
saying to Moses, Speak thou to us, and we will hear:
let not the Lord speak unto us, lest we die. No ear (if 
it be awaked and understandeth the meaning) is able to 
abide the voice of the law, except the promises of mercy 
be by. That thunder, except the reign of mercy be joined 
with it, destroyeth all, and buildeth not, The law is a 
witness against us, and testifieth that God abhorreth the 
sins that are in us, and us for our sins' sake.

In like manner, when God gave the people of Israel 
a king, it thundered and rained, that the people feared 
so sore, that they cried to Samuel for to pray for them 
that they should not die. (1 Kings xii.) As the law is a 
terrible thing; even so is the king. For he is ordained 
to take vengeance, and hath a sword in his hand, and not 
peacocks' feathers. Fear him, therefore, and look on
him as thou wouldest look on a sharp sword that hanged 
over thy head by an hair.

Heads and governors are ordained of God, and are 
even the gift of God, whether they be good or bad. And 
whatsoever is done to us by them, that doth God, be it 
good or bad. If they be evil, why are they evil? Verily, 
for our wickedness' sake are they evil. Because that when 
they were good, we would not receive that goodness of the 
hand of God, and be thankful: submitting ourse|ves unto 
his laws and ordinances, but abused the goodness of God 
unto our sensual and beastly lusts. Therefore doth God 
make his scourge of them, and turn them to wild beasts, 
contrary to the nature of their names and offices; even
unto lions, bears, foxes, and unclean swine, to avenge
himself of our unnatural and blind unkindness, and of 
our rebellious disobedience. 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
229

In the cvith Psalm, thou readest, He destroyed the 
rivers, and dried up the springs of water, and turned the 
fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of the in- 
habiters therein. When the children of Israel had for- 
gotten God in Egypt, God moved the hearts of the 
Egyptians to hate them, and to subdue them with craft 
and wiliness. (Psalm civ. and Deut. iii.) Moses re- 
hearseth, saying, God was angry with me for your 
sakes. So that the wrath of God fell on Moses, for the 
wickedness of the people. And in the second chap. of 
the second book of Kings, God was angry with the people, 
and moved David to number them; when Joab and the 
other lords wondered why he would have them numbered;
and because they feared lest some evil should follow, dis- 
suaded the king; yet it holp not. God so hardened his 
heart in his purpose, to have an occasion to slay the wicked 
people. 

Evil rulers then are a sign that God is angry and wroth
with us. Is it not a great wrath and vengeance that the
father and mother should hate their children, even their
flesh and their blood? Or that an husband should be 
unkind unto his wife, or a master unto the servant that 
waiteth on his profit; or that lords and kings should be 
tyrants unto their subjects and tenants, which pay them 
tribute, toll, custom and rent, labouring and toiling to 
find them in honour, and to maintain them in their estate?
Is not this a fearful judgment of God, and a cruel wrath, 
that the very prelates and shepherds of our souls, which 
were wont to feed Christ's flock with Christ's doctrine, 
and to walk before them in living thereafter, and to give 
their lives for them, to their ensample and edifying; and 
to strengthen their weak faiths; are now so sore changed, 
that if they smell that one of their flock (as they now call 
them, and no longer Christ's) do but once long or desire 
for the true knowledge of Christ, they will slay him, 
burning him with fire most cruelly? What is the cause
of this; and that they also teach false doctrine, confirming


230
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

The rigbt 
wny Lo 
rume of 
h&adAgc. 

it with lies? Verily, it is the hand of God, to avenge the 
wickedness of them that have no love nor lust unto the 
truth of God, when it is preached, but rejoice in un-
righteousness. As thou mayest see in the second Epistle 
of Paul to the Thessalonians, where he speaketh of the 
coming of antichrist; Whose coming shall be (saith he)
by the working of Satan, with all miracles, signs and 
wonders, which are but lies, and in all deceivable unrigh-
teousness among them that perish, because they received 
not any love to the truth to have been saved. Therefore 
shall God send them strong delusion, to believe lies. Mark 
how God, to avenge his truth, sendeth to the unthankful 
false doctrine and false miracles, to confirm them, and to 
harden their hearts in the false way, that afterward it shall 
not be possible for them to admit the truth. As thou
seest in Exod. vii. and viii., how God suffered false mira- 
cles to be showed in the sight of Pharaoh, to harden his 
heart, that he should not believe the truth, inasmuch as 
his sorcerers turned their rods into serpents, and turned 
water into blood, and made frogs by their enchantment:
so thought he that Moses did all his miracles by the same 
craft, and not by the power of God. And abode there- 
fore in unbelief, and perished in resisting God.

Let us receive all things of God, whether it be good or 
bad; let us humble ourselves under his mighty hand, and 
submit ourselves unto his nurture and chastising, and not 
withdraw ourselves from his correction. Read Heb. xii.
for thy comfort; and let us not take the staff by the end, 
or seek to avenge ourselves on his rod, which is the evil 
rulers. The child, as long as he seeketh to avenge him- 
self upon the rod, hath an evil heart. For he thinketh 
not that the correction is right, or that he hath deserved it, 
neither repenteth, but rejoiceth in his wickedness. And 
so long shall he never be without a rod: yea, so long 
shall the rod be made sharper and sharper. If he know- 
ledge his fault and take the correction meekly, and even 
kiss the rod, and amend himself with the learning and 


231 
TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.

nurture of his father and mother, then is the rod taken
away and burnt. 

So, if we resist evil rulers, seeking to act ourselves at 
liberty, we shall, no doubt, bring ourselves into more 
evil bondage, and wrap ourselves in much more misery 
and wretchedness. For if the heads overcome, then 
lay they more weight on their backs, and make their 
yoke sorer and tie them shorter. If they overcome their 
evil rulers, then make they way for a more cruel nation, or 
for some tyrant of their own nation, which hath no right 
unto the crown. If we submit ourselves unto the chas- 
tising of God, and meekly knowledge our sins for which 
we are scourged, and kiss the rod, and amend our living;
then will God take the rod away, that is, he will give the 
rulers a better heart. Or if they continue their malice 
and persecute you for well-doing, and because ye put your 
trust in God, then will God deliver you out of their 
tyranny for his truth's sake. It is the same God now that 
was in the old time, and delivered the fathers and the 
prophets, the apostles, and other holy saints. And what- 
soever he sware to them he hath sworn to us. And as he 
delivered them out of all temptation, cumbrance, and ad- 
versity, because they consented and submitted themselves 
unto his will, and trusted in his goodness and truth: even 
so will he do to us if we do likewise. 

Whensoever the children of Israel fell from the way 
which God commanded them to walk in, he gave them up 
under one tyrant or another. As soon as they came to the 
knowledge of themselves, and repented, crying for mercy, 
and leaning unto the truth of his promises, he sent one to 
deliver them, as the histories of the Bible make mention.

A Christian man, in respect of God, is but a passive thing,
a thing that suffereth only and doth nought; as the sick, 
in respect of the surgeon or physician, doth but suffer 
only. The surgeon lanceth and cutteth out the dead flesh, 
searcheth the wounds, thrusteth in tents, seareth, burneth, 
seweth or sticheth, and lieth to caustics to draw out the- 

A Ctimti&m 
niaii ddih 
btit auffcT 
ooly. 


232
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[TYNDALE.

Kvii rulers 

numf me- 

M Uhrtialliin 
man recciT* 

How pro- 
vcrsilf if* 

corruption; and, last of all, lieth to healing plaisters, and 
maketh it whole. The physician, likewise, giveth pur- 
gations and drinks to drive out tha disease, and then, with 
restoratives, bringeth health. Now if the sick resist the 
razor, the searching iron, and so forth, doth he not resist 
his own health, and is cause of his own death? So, like- 
wise, is it of us, if we resist evil rulers, which are the rod
and scourge wherewith God chastiseth us; the instruments 
wherewith God searcheth our wounds, and bitter drinks 
to drive out the sin and to make it appear, and caustics to 
draw out by the roots the core of the pox of the soul that 
fretteth inward. A Christian man, therefore, receiveth all 
things of the hand of God, both good and bad, both sweet 
and sour, both wealth and woe. If any person do me good, 
whether it be father, mother, and so forth, that receive I of 
God, and to God give thanks. For he gave wherewith, and 
gave a commandment, and moved his heart so to do. Ad- 
versity also receive I of the hand of God as an wholesome 
medicine, though it be somewhat bitter. Temptation and 
adversity do both kill sin, and also utter it. For though a 
Christian man knoweth every thing how to live, yet is the 
flesh so weak, that he can never take up his cross himself 
to kill and mortify the flesh. He must have another to 
lay it on his back. In many, also, sin lieth hid within, 
and festereth and rotteth inward, and is not seen; so that 
they think how they are good and perfect, and keep the 
law. As the young man (Matt. xix.) said, he had ob- 
served all of a child, and yet lied falsely in his heart, as 
the text following well declareth. When all is at peace, 
and no man troubleth us, we think that we are patient and 
love our neighbours as ourselves; but let our neighbour 
hurt us in word or deed, and then find we it otherwise.
Then fume we, and rage, and set up the bristles, and bend 
ourselves to take vengeance. If we loved with godly love 
for Christ's kindness' sake, we should desire no vengeance, 
but pity him, and desire God to forgive and amend him, 
knowing well that no flesh can do otherwise than sin;


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
233

except that God preserve him. Thou wilt say, What 
good doth such persecution and tyranny unto the righ-
teous? First, it maketh them feel the working of God's 
Spirit in them, and that their faith is unfeigned. Secon- 
darily, I say that no man is so great a sinner, if he repent 
and believe, but that he is righteous in Christ and in the 
promises: yet if thou look on the flesh, and unto the law, 
there is no man so perfect that is not found a sinner. Nor 
any man so pure that hath not somewhat to be yet purged.
This shall suffice at this time as concerning obedience. 

Because that God excludeth no degree from his 
mercy; but whosoever repenteth, and believeth his pro- 
mises, (of whatsoever degree he be of,) the same shall be 
partaker of his grace; therefore, as I have described the 
obedience of them that are under power and rule, even so 
will I, with God's help, (as my duty is,) declare how the 
rulers which God shall vouchsafe to call unto the know- 
ledge of the truth, ought to rule. 

*nie grr.kt^ 
cul sinner 
IB rii^bl«oii5 

inClinsI, 
ami the 
promise!. 
And the 
pcrrceteat 
and hffllr^t 

in lilt: Iaw 
niid the 


THE OFFICE OF A FATHER, AND HOW HE 
SHOULD RULE. 

Fathers, move not your children unto wrath, but 
bring them up in the nurture and information of the 
Lord. (Eph. vi. and Col. iii.) Fathers, rate not your 
children, lest they be of desperate mind; that is, lest you 
discourage them. For where the fathers and mothers are 
wayward, hasty and churlish, ever brawling and chiding, 
there are the children anon discouraged and heartless, and 
apt for nothing; neither can they do any thing aright. 
Bring them up in the nurture and information of the 
Lord. Teach them to know Christ, and set God's or- 
dinance before them, saying, Son, or daughter, God hath 
created thee and made thee, through us thy father and 

Rigour ]□ 
piireiits 
to^viirdii 
their rbil - 
dren is to 
Ue escliciv* 

ITie righi 
bringing up 
of child r^D. 


234
THE OBEDlENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Tl»c tte- 

jiad mutT- 
ing of ch'^l 
dieu. 

Ttie raar- 
riflgc of 
children 
withoul 
consent at 
tlicir pii- 
rcnt4t IS 
unlawful* 

la Clirist 
we nro all 
tervantSp 
And be 
ib«i IiaUi 
koDwledge 
Is botind. 

mother, and at his commandment have we so long thus
kindly brought thee up, and kept thee from all perils; he 
hath commanded thee also to obey us, saying, Children,
obey thy father and mother. If thou meekly obey, so 
shalt thou grow both in the favour of God and man, and 
knowledge of our Lord Christ. If thou wilt not obey us 
at his commandment, then are we charged to correct thee;
yea, and if thou repent not, and amend thyself, God shall 
slay thee by his officers, or punish thee everlastingly. 
Nurture them not worldly, and with worldly wisdom, 
saying, Thou shalt come to honour, dignity, promotion, 
and riches; thou shalt be better than such and such; thou 
shalt have three or four benefices, and be a great doctor or 
a bishop, and have so many men waiting on thee, and do 
nothing but hawk and hunt, and live at pleasure; thou 
shalt not need to sweat, to labour, or to take any pain for 
thy living, and so forth; filling them full of pride, disdain,
and ambition, and corrupting their minds with worldly 
persuasions. Let the fathers and mothers mark how they 
themselves were disposed at all ages; and by experience 
of their own infirmities help their children, and keep 
them from occasions. Let them teach their children to 
ask marriages of their fathers and mothers. And let their 
elders provide marriages for them in season; teaching 
them also to know, that she is not his wife whom the son 
taketh, nor he her husband which the daughter taketh, 
without the consent and good will of their elders, or them 
that have authority over them. If their friends will not 
marry them, then are they not to blame if they marry 
themselves. Let not the fathers and mothers always take 
the utmost of their authority of their children; but at a 
time suffer with them, and bear their weaknesses, as Christ 
doth ours. Seek Christ in your children, in your wives, 
servants, and subjects. Father, mother, son, daughter, 
master, servant, king, and subject, be names in the worldly 
regiment. In Christ we are all one thing; none better 
than another, all brethren; and all must seek Christ, and 


Tyndale.] 
A CHRISTIAN MAN. 
235 

our brother's profit in Christ. And he that hath the 
knowledge, whether he be the Lord or king, is bound to 
submit himself and serve his brethren, and to give himself 
for them to win them to Christ. 

THE OFFICE OF AN HUSBAND AND HOW HE 
OUGHT TO RULE. 

HUSBANDS, love your wives as Christ loved the con- 
gregation, and gave himself for it, to sanctify it and 
cleanse it. Men ought to love their wives, as their own 
bodies. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother 
and shall continue with his wife, and shall be made both 
one flesh. See that every one of you love his wife even as 
his own body: All this saith Paul Eph. v. And Col. iii. 
he saith, Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter unto 
them. And Peter in the iiird chapter of his first Epistle, 
saith, Men, dwell with your wives according to knowledge, 
(that is according to the doctrine of Christ) giving rever- 
ence unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel; (that is, 
help her to bear her infirmities) and as unto them that are 
heirs also of the grace of life, that your prayers be not let. 
In many things God hath made the men stronger than the 
women; not to rage upon them and to be tyrants unto them, 
but to help them to bear their weakness. Be cour- 
teous therefore unto them, and win them unto Christ, and 
overcome them with kindness, that of love they may obey 
the ordinance that God hath made between man and wife. 

Men onght 
to rnle their 
wires by- 
God's word. 

Why the 
man is 
stronger 
than the 
woman. 


236 
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[Tyndale. 

THE OFFICE OF A MASTER AND HOW HE 
OUGHT TO RULE.

Ttehtiiy 
lervantto 

kMMT 

Clnlit^aiid 
after 
Ciiriif s 
doctrine 
deal with 

Do all 
thing with 
God^s 
word* 

PAUL (Eph. vith) saith: Ye matters do even the same 
things to them, (that is be master after the ensample 
and doctrine of Christ, as he before taught the servants to 
obey to their masters as to Christ) putting away threat- 
enings (that is, give them fair words, and exhort them 
kindly to do their duty; yea, nurture them as thy own 
sons with the Lord's nurture, that they may see in Christ 
a cause why they ought lovingly to obey) and remember 
(saith he) that your master also is in heaven. Neither is 
there any respect of persons with him; that is, he is in- 
different and not partial: as great in his sight is a servant 
as a master. And in the iiird chapter to the Colossians, 
saith he: Ye masters do unto your servants that which is 
just and equal, remembering that ye also have a master in 
heaven. Give your servants kind words, food, raiment 
and learning. Be not bitter unto them, rail not on them, 
give them no cruel countenance: but according to the en- 
sample and doctrine of Christ, deal with them. And 
when they labour sore, cherish them again. When ye 
correct them, let God's word be by, and do it with such 
good manner that they may see how that ye do it to amend 
them only, and to bring them to the way which God 
biddeth us walk in, and not to avenge yourselves, or to 
wreak your malice on them. If at a time through hastiness 
ye exceed measure in punishing, recompense it another 
way, and pardon them another time. 


TYNDALE.] 
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
237 

THE DUTY OF LANDLORDS. 

Let Christian landlords be content with their rent and 
old customs; not raising the rent or fines, and bringing 
up new customs to oppress their tenants : neither letting 
two or three tenantries unto one man. Let them not take 
in their commons, neither make parks nor pastures of 
whole parishes. For God gave the earth to man to inhabit, 
and not unto sheep and wild deer. Be as fathers unto 
your tenants: yea be unto them as Christ was unto us, 
and shew unto them all love and kindness. Whatsoever 
business is among them, be not partial, favouring one more 
than another. The complaints, quarrels, and strife that 
are among them, count diseases of sick people, and as a 
merciful physician heal them with wisdom and good coun- 
sel. Be pitiful and tender hearted unto them, and let not 
one of thy tenants tear out another's throat, but judge 
their causes indifferently, and compel them to make their 
ditches, hedges, gates and ways. For even for such causes 
were ye made landlords, and for such causes paid men rent 
at the beginning. For if such an order were not, one 
should slay another, and all should go to waste. If thy 
tenant shall labour and toil all the year to pay thee thy rent, 
and when he hath bestowed all his labour, his neighbours' 
cattle shall devour his fruits, how tedious and bitter should 
his life be! See therefore that ye do your duties again, and 
suffer no man to do them wrong, save the king only. If 
he do wrong, then must they abide God's judgment. 

Lnndlurils 
fiboulJ 
raise no 
Tt'nls^r u(>r 
bring ixn 
new cu#> 
toina^ 

Got\ f Jive 
tlie earth 
U> men. 

Landlordf 

witlistjtnd 

tlie wrong 
of the tc* 


238 
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
[TYNDALE.

THE DUTY OF KINGS, AND OF THE JUDGES 
AND OFFICERS. 

Ttierelf 
DO respect 
of person 
nfure GnJ, 

Mosca, 

Let kings (if they had lever be Christian in deed, than 
so to be called) give themselves altogether to the wealth 
of their realms after the ensample of Christ; remembering 
that the people are God's, and not their's, yea are Christ's 
inheritance and possession bought with his blood. The 
most despised person in his realm is the king's brother, 
and fellow member with him, and equal with him in the 
kingdom of God and of Christ. Let him therefore not 
think himself too good to do them service, neither seek any 
other thing in them, than a father seeketh in his children, 
yea than Christ sought in us. Though that the king in the 
temporal regiment be in the room of God, and representeth 
God himself, and is without all comparison better than 
his subjects; yet let him put off that and become a brother, 
doing and leaving undone all things in respect of the com- 
monwealth, that all men may see that he seeketh nothing, 
but the profit of his subjects. When a cause that requireth 
execution is brought before him, then only let him take the 
person of God on him. Then let him know no creature 
but hear all indifferently; whether it be a stranger or one 
of his own realm, and the small as well as the great; and 
judge righteously, for the judgment is the Lord's. (Deut. 
i.) In time of judgment he is no minister in the kingdom 
of Christ; he preacheth no gospel but the sharp law 
of vengeance. Let him take the holy judges of the old 
Testament for an ensample, and namely Moses, which in 
executing the law was merciless otherwise; more than a 
mother unto them, never avenging his own wrongs, but 
suffering all things; bearing every man's weakness, teaching, 
warning, exhorting, and ever caring for them, and so 
tenderly loved them, that he desired God either to forgive 
them, or to damn him with them. 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
239

Let the judges also privately, when they have put off 
the person of a judge, exhort with good counsel, and 
warn the people and help, that they come not at God's 
judgment: but the causes that are brought to them, 
when they sit in God's stead, let them judge and condemn 
the trespasser under lawful witnesses, and not break up 
into the consciences of men, after the example of anti- 
christ's disciples, and compel them either to forswear 
themselves by the almighty God, and by the holy gospel 
of his merciful promises, or to testify against themselves. 
Which abomination our prelates learned of Caiphas, 
(Matt. xxvi.) saying to Christ, I adjure or charge thee in 
the name of the living God, that thou tell us whether 
thou be Christ, the son of God: let that which is secret 
to God only, whereof no proof can be made, nor 
lawful witness brought, abide to the coming of the 
Lord, which shall open all secrets. If any malice break 
forth, let them judge only. For further authority hath 
God not given them. 

Moses (Deut. xvii.) warneth judges to keep them up- 
right, and to look on no man's person; that is, that they 
prefer not the high before the low, the great before the 
small, the rich before poor, his acquaintance, friend, 
kinsman, countryman, or one of his own nation before 
a stranger, a friend or an alien, yea, or one of their own 
faith before an infidel: but that they look on the cause 
only to judge indifferently. For the room that they are 
in, and the law that they execute, are God's; which, as 
he hath made all, and is God of all, and all are his sons: 
even so is he judge over all, and will have all judged by 
his law indifferently, and to have the right of his law, and 
will avenge the wrong done unto the Turk or Saracen. 
For though they be not under the everlasting testament of 
God in Christ, as few of us which are called Christian 
be, and even no more than to whom God hath sent his 
promises, and poured his Spirit into their hearts to be- 
lieve them, and through faith graven lust in their hearts, 

JMi!ffea- 

A tymnny 
to cojuprl 
n man ti> 

eel of €al* 
phfts. 

S<?criet sins 
pertAin 
xiata God 
In pimiiib^ 
and open 
sinB iinta 
ibe king. 

rarlittlUy 
til Irirlge^ia 
wicked. 


240
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

PjirlUliljr 

Hnd bn(je 
tsking ii 

tUeooe of 

ftlde, And 

ronlciupt of 

are the 
of ^rinc^i. 

Tin? liol>< 
fntliffr 

pcftcc Jtnti 
iKilty, 
truce, 
tnithf itiut 
all IjotiP^tr. 

to fulfil the law of love; yet are they under the testament 
of the law natural, which is the laws of every land made 
for the common wealth there, and for peace and unity, 
that one may live by another. In which laws the infidels 
(if they keep them) have promises of worldly things. 
Whosoever, therefore, hindreth a very infidel from the 
right of that law, sinneth against God, and of him will 
God be avenged. Moreover, Moses warneth them that 
they receive no gifts, rewards or bribes. For those two 
points, favouring of one person more than another, and 
receiving rewards, pervert all right and equity, and is the 
only pestilence of all judges. 

And the kings warneth he that they have not too many 
wives, lest their hearts turn away: and that they read 
alway in the law of God, to learn to fear him, lest their 
hearts be lift up above their brethren. Which two points, 
women and pride, the despising of their subjects, which 
are in very deed their own brethren, are the common pesti- 
lence of all princes. Read the stories, and see. 

The sheriffs, baily errants, constables, and such like officers, 
may let no man that hurteth his neighbour scape, but that 
they bring them before the judges, except they in the mean 
time agree with their neighbours, and make them amends. 

Let kings defend their subjects from the wrongs of other 
nations, but pick no quarrels for every trifle: no, let not 
our most holy father make them no more so drunk with 
vain names, with caps of maintenance, and like baubles, 
as it were puppetry for children, to beggar their realms, 
and to murder their people, for defending of our holy 
father's tyranny. If a lawful peace, that standeth with 
God's word, be made between prince and prince, and 
the name of God taken to record, and the body of our 
Saviour broken between them, upon the bond which they 
have made; that peace or bond can our holy father not 
dispense with, neither loose it with all the keys he hath:
no, verily, Christ cannot break it. For he came not to 
break the law, but to fulfil it. (Matt. v.) 

I 
I 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
241

If any man have broken the law, or a good ordinance, 
and repent and come to the right way again, then hath 
Christ power to forgive him: but licence to break the 
law can he not give; much more his disciples and vicars 
(as they call themselves) cannot do it. The keys whereof 
they so greatly boast themselves, are no carnal things, but 
spiritual, and nothing else save knowledge of the law, 
and of the promises or gospel: if any man for lack of 
spiritual feeling desire authority of men, let him read the 
old doctors. If any man desire authority of Scripture, 
Christ saith, (Luke xi.) Woe be to you lawyers, for ye 
have taken away the key of knowledge: ye enter not in 
yourselves, and them that come in, ye forbid. That is, 
they had blinded the Scripture, whose knowledge (as it 
were a key) letteth into God, with glosses and traditions. 
Likewise findest thou, (Matt. xxiii.) as Peter answered 
in the name of all; so Christ promised him the keys in 
the person of all. (Matt. xvi.) And in the xxth of John, 
he paid them, saying, Receive the Holy Ghost; who- 
soever sins ye remit, they are remitted or forgiven, and 
whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained or holden. 
With preaching the promises, loose they as many as re- 
pent and believe. And for that John saith, Receive the 
Holy Ghost. Luke, in his last chapter, saith, Then 
opened he their wits, that they might understand the 
Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is written. And 
thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again the 
third day. And that repentance and remission of sins 
should be preached in his name among all nations. At 
preaching of the law, repent men; and at the preaching 
of the promises, do they believe, and are saved. Peter, 
in the second of the Acts, practised his keys, and by 
preaching the law, brought the people into the knowledge 
of themselves, and bound their consciences, so that they 
were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and to 
the other apostles, What shall we do? Then brought 
they forth the key of the sweet promises, saying, Repent,

VOL. II R 

WImt ihe 
keys ntv, 
11 lid wliy 
th«!y nrc ia 

lire pno- 
Tlic ki?\Ti 

Tt> bind 
and Ifioie. 

Repciit- 
nncp fluid 
fQrg:ivenf;$9 
tome by 
preach in If. 

Pctcr pmc- 
tlsetb his 
kcya. 


242
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Tbv Pope's 
8«tlicirUy 
h la prt'^ch 
Goil'H word 
ajilv. 

Bcii^Jire of 

lljc net J 
nnd of the 
U'liven* and 
of the 
counter- 
feit keys of 
our liofy 
fatlicr. 

Not witli 

nil lit*rerlc 
^I'llli the 
Pope. 

UnlntV'fiil 
vova or 
OHlh» men 
arc com^ 
innndiHt to 
break. 

and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus 
Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the 
gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise was made to 
you, and to your children, and to all that are afar, even 
as many as the Lord shall call. Of like ensamples is the 
Acts full, and Peter's Epistles, and Paul's Epistles, and 
all the Scripture; neither hath our holy father any other 
authority of Christ, or by the reason of his predecessor, 
Peter, than to preach God's word. As Christ com- 
pareth the understanding of Scripture to a key, so 
compareth he it to a net, and to leaven, and to 
many other things for certain properties. I marvel, there- 
fore, that they boast not themselves of their net and 
leaven, as well as of their keys, for they are all one thing. 
But as Christ biddeth us beware of the leaven of the 
Pharisees, so beware of their counterfeited keys, and of 
their false net (which are their traditions and ceremonies, 
their hypocrisy and false doctrine, wherewith they catch, not 
souls unto Christ, but authority and riches unto themselves.) 

Let christian kings therefore keep their faith and truth, 
and all lawful promises and bonds, not one with another 
only, but even with the Turk or whatsoever infidel it be. 
For so it is right before God, as the Scriptures and en- 
samples of the Bible testify. Whosoever voweth an un- 
lawful vow, promiseth an unlawful promise, sweareth an 
unlawful oath, sinneth against God, and ought therefore 
to break it. He needeth not sue to Rome for a licence, 
for he hath God's word, and not a licence only, but also a 
commandment to break it. They therefore that are sworn 
to be true to cardinals and bishops, that is to say, false 
unto God, the king, and the realm, may break their oaths 
lawfully without grudge of conscience, by the authority of 
God's word. In making them they sinned, but in re- 
penting and breaking them they please God highly, and re- 
ceive forgiveness in Christ, 

Let kings take their duty of their subjects, and that is 
necessary to the defence of the realm. Let them rule 


TYNDALE]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
243

Belioli] tlic 
fjice of thi' 
Pope Naduf 

in tUia 

their realms themselves, with the help of lay men that are 
sage, wise, learned, and expert. Is it not a shame above 
all shames, and a monstrous thing, that no man should be 
found able to govern a worldly kingdom, save by bishops and 
prelates, that have forsaken the world, and are taken out of
the world, and appointed to preach the kingdom of God?
Christ saith that His kingdom is not of this world. (John 
xviii.) And (Luke xii.) unto the young man that desired
him to bid his brother to give him part of the inheritance, 
he answered, Who made made me a judge or a divider 
among you? No man that layeth his hand to the plough, 
and looketh back, is apt for the kingdom of heaven. (Luke 
ix.) No man can serve two masters, but he must despise 
the one. (Matt. vi.) 

To preach God's word is too much for half a man: and 
to minister a temporal kingdom is too much for half a man 
also: either other requireth an whole man; one therefore 
cannot well do both. He that avengeth himself on every 
trifle, is not meet to preach the patience of Christ, how 
that a man ought to forgive and to suffer all things. He
that is overwhelmed with all manner [of] riches, and doth 
but seek more daily, is not meet to preach poverty. He 
that will obey no man, is not meet to preach how we ought 
to obey all men. Peter saith (Acts vi.) It is not meet 
that we should leave the word of God and serve at the ta-
bles. Paul saith in the ixth chapter of the first Co- 
rinthians, Woe is me if I preach not. A terrible saying, ve-
rily, for popes, cardinals, and bishops. If he had said, Woe 
be unto me if I fight not and move princes unto war, or if 
I increase not St. Peter's patrimony, (as they call it) it had 
been a more easy saying for them. 

Christ forbiddeth his disciples and that oft, (as thou mayest 
Matt. see xviii and also xx. Mark ix. and also x. Luke ix. and 
also xxii. even at his last supper) not only to clime above lords, 
kings, and emperors in worldly rule, but also to exalt them- 
selves one above another in the kingdom of God. But in 
vain, for the pope would not hear it, though he had com-

it2 

p4*t<'r*» fa- 
ir J mony. 

The Pope** 
antbority is
iai[iii]r«d.


244 

have cap- 
lived God^B 
vord iritb 
tiieir own 
decrees. 

THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

4 

manded it ten thousand times. God's word should rule
only; and not bishops' decrees, or the pope's pleasure: that
ought they to preach purely and spiritually, and to fashion 
their lives after, and with all ensample of godly living and 
long suffering to draw all to Christ: and not to expound 
the Scriptures carnally and worldly, saying, God spake this 
to Peter, and I am his successor, therefore this authority 
is mine only; and then bring in the tyranny of their fleshly 
wisdom, in prasentia majoris, cessat potestas minoris that is
in the presence of the greater the less hath hath no power.
There is no brotherhood where such philosophy is taught. 

Such philosophy, and so to abuse the Scriptures, and to
mock with God's word, is after the manner of the bishop 
of Rochester's divinity; for he in his Sermon of the con- 
demnation of Martin Luther, proveth by a shadow of the 
Old Testament, that is, by Moses and Aaron, that Satan 
and antichrist, our most holy father the pope, is Christ's 
vicar and head of Christ's congregation. 

Moses, saith he, signifieth Christ, and Aaron the pope; 
and yet the Epistle unto the Hebrews proveth, that the 
high priest of the old law signifieth Christ, and his offer- 
ing and his going in once in the year into the inner temple, 
signify the offering wherewith Christ offered himself, and 
Christ's going in unto the Father to be an everlasting Me- 
diator or Intercessor for us. Nevertheless, Rochester 
proveth the contrary by a shadow, by a shadow verily: for 
in shadows they walk without all shame, and the light will 
they not come at, but enforce to stop and quench it with 
all craft and falsehood, lest their abominable juggling 
should be seen. If any man look in the light of the New 
Testament he shall clearly see, that that shadow may not
be so understood.

Understand therefore that one thing in the Scripture re- 
presenteth divers things: a serpent figureth Christ in one 
place, and the devil in another, and a lion doth likewise. 
Christ by leaven signifieth God's word in one place, and in 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
245

another signifieth thereby the traditions of the pharisees, 
which soured and altered God's word for their advantage. 
Now Moses verily in the said place representeth Christ, 
and Aaron, which was not yet high priest, represented not
Peter only or his successor, as my lord of Rochester would 
have it, (for Peter was too little to bear Christ's message 
unto all the world) but signifieth every disciple of Christ, and 
every true preacher of God's word. For Moses put in 
Aaron's mouth what he should say, and Aaron was Mo- 
ses's prophet, and spake not his own message (as the pope 
and bishops do) but that which Moses had received of God 
and delivered unto him. (Exod. iv. and also vii.) So ought 
every preacher to preach God's word purely, and neither 
to add nor minish. A true messenger must do his message 
truly, and say neither more nor less than he is commanded. 
Aaron when he is high priest, and offereth and purgeth the 
the people of their worldly sin which they had fallen in, in 
touching uncleanly things, and in eating meats forbidden, 
(as we sin in handling the chalice and the altar stone, and 
are purged with the bishop's blessing) representeth Christ, 
which purgeth us from all sin in the sight of God: as the 
Epistle unto the Hebrews maketh mention: when Moses 
was gone up into the mount and Aaron left behind, and 
made the golden calf; there Aaron representeth all false 
preachers, and namely, our most holy father the pope, 
which in like manner maketh us believe in a bull, as the 
bishop of Rochester full well allegeth the place in his 
Sermon. 

If the pope be signified by Aaron, and Christ by Moses, 
why is not the pope as well content with Christ's law and 
doctrine, as Aaron was with Moses'? what is the cause 
that our bishops preach the pope and not Christ, seeing 
the apostles preached not Peter, but Christ? Paul (2 
Cor. iv.) saith of himself and his fellow apostles, We 
preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and preach 
ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake: and (1 Cor. iii.) 
Let no man rejoice in men, for all things are yours, whether 

AaroQ TH 
iCvery tnio 

CUrlit. 

AiiroD ntt> 
dcUi na- 
tbing Eq 
Moses's 
lnvr. 

Tbe HpostU 

not Pelcr 
hut CUrist. 


246 
THE OBEDIENCE OF 
TYNDALE. 

than bii;l!i 

Pjilll it 
greater 
llian Peter. 
Paul 

pmvclU bu* 

tthip witli 

preachiiTg 
and attlici * 
iDg : tUc 
bUhopa 
prove Ibeir 
jtpostlesliip 
in btiJUBSad 
sbailuwa. 

it be Paul, or Apollos, or Peter; whether it be the world, 
or life, or death; whether they be present things, or things 
to come; all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and 
Christ is God's. He leaveth out Ye are Peter's, or Ye are 
the pope's. And in the chapter following, he saith, Let men 
thuswise esteem us, even the ministers of Christ, &c. And 
(2 Cor. xi.) Paul was jealous over his Corinthians, because 
they fell from Christ, to whom he had married them, and 
did cleave unto the authority of men, (for even then false 
prophets sought authority in the name of the high apostles,) 
I am, saith he, jealous over you with godly jealousy, for I 
coupled you to one man, to make you a chaste virgin to 
Christ; but I fear lest as the serpent deceived Eve 
through his subtlety, even so your wits should be corrupt 
from the singleness that is in Christ. And it followeth, If 
he that cometh to you preached another Jesus, or if ye re- 
ceive another spirit or another gospel, then might ye well 
have been content: that is, ye might have well suffered him 
to have authority above me: but I suppose, saith he, that 
I was not behind the high apostles; meaning in preaching 
Jesus and his gospel, and in ministering the Spirit. And 
in the said xith chapter, he proveth by the doctrine of 
Christ, that he is greater than the high apostles; for Christ 
saith to be great in the kingdom of God is to do service 
and to take pains for other. Upon which rule Paul dis- 
puteth, saying, If they be the ministers of Christ, I am more. 
In labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in 
prison more plenteously, in death oft, and so forth. If Paul 
preacheth Christ more than Peter, and suffered more for 
his congregation, then is he greater than Peter by the tes- 
timony of Christ. And in the xiith he saith, In nothing was 
I inferior unto the high apostles: though I be nothing, yet 
the tokens of an apostle were wrought among you with all 
patience, with signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds. So 
proved he his authority, and not with a bull from Peter, 
sealed with cold lead, either with shadows of the Old Tes- 
tament falsley expounded. 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
247

Moreover the apostles were sent immediately of Christ, 
and of Christ received they their authority, as Paul boasteth 
himself every where. Christ, saith he, sent me to preach 
the gospel. (1 Cor. i.) And I received of the Lord that 
which I delivered unto you, (1 Cor. xi. and Gal. i.) I cer- 
tify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of 
me was not after the manner of men, (that is to wit car- 
nal or fleshly) neither received I it of man, neither was 
it taught me, but I received it by the revelation of Jesus 
Christ. And (Gal ii.) He that was mighty in Peter in the 
apostleship over the circumcision, was mighty in me 
among the gentiles. And ist Tim. i. readest thou like- 
wise. And (John xx.) Christ sent them forth indifferently, 
and gave them like power: As my father sent me, saith he, 
so send I you; that is, to preach and to suffer as I have 
done; and not to conquer enemies and kingdoms, and to sub- 
due all temporal power under you with disguised hypocrisy. 
He gave them the Holy Ghost to bind and loose indifferently, 
as thou seest; and afterward he sent forth Paul with like 
authority, as thou seest in the Acts; and in the last of Mat- 
thew saith he, All power is given me in heaven and in 
earth, go, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in 
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost, teaching them to observe whatsoever I commanded 
you. The authority that Christ gave them was to preach; 
yet not what they would imagine, but what he had com- 
manded. Lo, saith he, I am with you always, even unto 
the end of the world. He said not, I go my way, and lo here 
is Peter in my stead: but sent them every man to a sundry 
country, whithersoever the Spirit carried them, and went 
with them himself. And as he wrought with Peter where 
he went, so wrought he with the other where they went, 
as Paul boasteth of himself unto the Galatians. Seeing now 
that we have Christ's doctrine, and Christ's holy promises, 
and seeing that Christ is ever present with us his own self, 
how Cometh it that Christ may not reign immediately over 
us as well as the pope which cometh never at us? seeing 

llea were 
fteut of 
CInist in 
Hkc autlio* 
rity. 

Tiic autltf)" 
lity llinl 
Chiist ifRTC 
was to 
preacti 


248
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

WTiy Ul^h- 
op» mnkc 
tlicrn 4 God 
on c«rth. 
Aaron 

&nd llic 
Popo 
iniikoih 
bulls, 

Ttif sliavf-ri 
nntion hRth 
put rUnst 
out of Ilk 
rocjTJi Atid 
ah kitif^s 
and tlie 1:111- 

also that the office of an apostle is to preach only, how can 
the pope challenge with right any authority where he 
preacheth not? How cometh it also that Rochester will 
not let us be called one congregation, by the reason of one 
God, one Christ, one Spirit, one gospel, one faith, one 
hope, and one baptism, as well as because of one pope? 

If any natural beast with his wordly wisdom strive that 
one is greater than another, because that in congregations 
one is sent of another, as we see in the Acts; I answer 
that Peter sent no man, but was sent himself; and John 
was sent, and Paul, Silas, and Barnabas were sent, 
Howbeit such manner [of] sendings are not worldly, as 
princes send ambassadors; no, nor as friars send their li- 
miters to gather their brotherhoods; which must obey 
whether they will or will not. Here all thing is free and wil- 
lingly: and the Holy Ghost bringeth them together, which 
maketh their wills free, and ready to bestow themselves up- 
on their neighbour's profit: and they that come offer them- 
selves, and all that they have or can do to serve the Lord 
and their brethren: and every man as he is found apt and 
meet to serve his neighbour, so is he sent or put in office. 
And of the Holy Ghost are they sent with the consent of 
their brethren and with their own consent also; and God's 
word ruleth in that congregation unto which word every 
man confirmeth his will: and Christ which is always present 
is the head. But as our bishops hear not Christ's voice 
so see they him not present, and therefore make them a 
God on the earth, of the kind I suppose of Aaron's calf, 
for he bringeth forth no other fruit but bulls. 

Forasmuch also as Christ is as great as Peter, why is 
not his seat as great as Peter's? Had the head of the em- 
pire been at Jerusalem, there had been no mention made of 
Peter. It is verily, as Paul saith in the xith chapter of the 
iind Epistle to the Corinthians, The false apostles are de- 
ceitful workers, and fashion themselves like unto the 
apostles of Christ; that is the shaven nation preach Christ 
falsely; yea, under the name of Christ preach them- 


TYNDALE.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 249 

selves, and reign in Christ's stead: have also taken away 
the key of knowledge and wrapped the people in ignorance, 
and have taught them to believe in themselves, in their tra- 
ditions and false ceremonies; so that Christ is but a vain
name, and after they had put Christ out of his room they
got themselves to the emperor and kings, and so long mi- 
nistered their business till they have also put them out of 
their rooms, and have got their authorities from them and
reign also in their stead; so that the emperor and kings are 
but vain names and shadows, as Christ is, having nothing to 
do in the world: thus reign they in the stead of God and 
man, and have all power under them, and do what they 
list.

Let us see another point of our great clerk; a little after
the beginning of his Sermon, intending to prove that which
is clearer than the sun, and serveth no more for his pur-
pose than Ite missa est serveth to prove that our lady was 
born without original sin; he allegeth a saying that Martin 
Luther saith, which is this, If we affirm that any one 
Epistle of Paul or any one place of his Episdes pertaineth 
not unto the universal church, (that is, to all the congre- 
gation of them that believe in Christ,) we take away all St. 
Paul's authority. Whereupon saith Rochester, if it be thus 
of the words of St. Paul, much rather it is true of the gos- 
pels of Christ and of every place of them. O malicious 
blindness! First, note his blindness. He understandeth 
by this word gospel, no more but the four Evangelists, 
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John; and thinketh not that 
the Acts of Apostles, and the Epistles of Peter, of Paul,
and of John, and of other like, are also the gospel. Paul
calleth his preaching the gospel: (Rom. ii. and 1 Cor. iv.
and Gal. i. and 1 Tim. i.) The gospel is every where 
one, though it be preached of divers, and signifieth glad
tidings: that is to wit, an open preaching of Christ and
the holy Testament, and gracious promises that God hath 
made in Christ's blood, to all that repent and believe. 
Now, is there more gospel in one Epistle of Paul, that is to 


250
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

tine p^''»|«'lj 
one Spirit, 
Dnc truth. 

TJic nutlio- 
rityof Vaatf 
Hnd bi* 
gMfeL 

Roirfacvt^r 
plftyeth 

say, Christ is more clearly preached, and more promises 
rehearsed in one Epistle of Paul, than in ihe three first 
Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke. 

Consider also his maliciousness; how wickedly and how 
craftily he taketh away the authority of Paul! It is much 
rather true of the gospels, and of every place in them, than 
of Paul, If that which the four Evangelists wrote be 
truer than that which Paul wrote, then is it not one gospel 
that they preached, neither one Spirit that taught them.
If it be one gospel and one Spirit, how is one truer than 
the other? Paul proveth his authority to the Galatians 
and to the Corinthians, because that he received his gospel 
by revelation of Christ, and not of man: and because that 
when he communed with Peter and the high apostles of 
his gospel and preaching, they could improve nothing, 
neither teach him any thing: and because, also, that as 
many were converted, and as great miracles shewed by his 
preaching as at the preaching of the high apostles, and 
therefore will be of no less authority than Peter and other 
high apostles: nor have his gospel of less reputation 
than their's. 

Finally: that thou mayest know Rochester for ever, 
and all the remnant by him, what they are within the 
skin, mark how he playeth bo-peep with the Scripture. 
He allegeth the beginning of the tenth chapter to the 
Hebrews. Umbram habens lex futurorum bonorum, 
the law hath but a shadow of things to come. And im- 
mediately expoundeth the figure clean contrary unto the 
chapter following, and to all the whole Epistle; making 
Aaron a figure of the Pope, whom the Epistle maketh a 
figure of Christ. 

He allegeth half a text of Paul, (1 Tim. iv.) In the 
latter days some shall depart from the faith, giving heed 
unto spirits of error and devilish doctrine: but it followeth 
in the text, Giving attendance, or heed, unto the devilish 
doctrine of them which speak false, through hypocrisy, 
and have their consciences marked with a hot iron, for- 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRlSTIAN MAN.
251

Never mtin 

innrry SiVV« 
the I'opCi 

bidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, 
which God hath created to be received with giving thanks. 
Which two things whoever did, save the pope, Roches-
ter's God? making sin in the creatures which God hath 
created for man's use, to be received with thanks. The 
kingdom of heaven is not meat and drink, saith Paul, but 
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. For 
whosoever in these things serveth Christ, pleaseth God, 
and is allowed of men. (Rom. xiv.) Had Rochester, 
therefore, not a conscience marked with the hot iron of 
malice, so that he cannot consent unto the will of God 
and glory of Christ, he would not so have alleged the 
text, which is contrary to none save themselves. 

He allegeth another text of Paul, in the second chapter 
of his second Epistle to the Thessalonians. Erit dissessio 
primum; that is, saith Rochester, before the coming of 
Antichrist there shall be a notable departing from the 
faith. And Paul saith, The Lord cometh not, except 
there come a departing first. Paul's meaning is, that the 
last day cometh not so shortly, but that Antichrist shall 
come first and destroy the faith, and sit in the temple of 
God, and make all men worship him, and believe in him 
(as the Pope doth); and then shall God's word come to 
light again, (as it doth at this time,) and destroy him, and 
utter his juggling, and then cometh Christ unto judg- 
ment. What say ye of this crafty conveyer? Would he 
spare, suppose ye, to allege and to wrest other doctors 
pestilently, which feareth not for to juggle with the holy 
Scripture of God, expounding that unto Antichrist which 
Paul speaketh of Christ? No, be ye sure. But even 
after this manner-wise pervert they the whole Scripture 
and all doctors, wresting them unto their abominable 
purpose, clean contrary to the meaning of the text, and to 
the circumstances that go before and after. Which de- 
vilish falsehood, lest the laymen should perceive, is the 
very cause why that they will not suffer the Scripture to be
had in the English tongue; neither any work to be made

will not 
Imt^c the 


252
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TyNDALE.

Tully chu'f 
of OMlars. 

Rochester 

Paul for Ills 
bliad C4.' re- 
ma mi^a, 

conirary to 
r&uVi duc- 
trme. 

that should bring the people to knowledge of the 
truth. 

He allegeth, for the pope's authority, St. Cyprian, 
St. Augustine, Ambrose, Jerom, and Origen; of which 
never one knew of any authority that one bishop should 
have above another. And St. Gregory, allegeth he, which 
would receive no such authoritv above his brethren when it 
was proffered him. As the manner is to call Tully chief 
of orators, for his singular eloquence, and Aristotle chief 
of philosophers, and Virgil chief of poets, for their sin- 
gular learning; and not for any authority that they had 
over other: so was it the manner to call Peter chief of the 
apostles, for his singular activity and boldness; and not 
that he should be lord over his brethren, contrary to his 
own doctrine. Yet compare that chief apostle unto Paul, 
and he is found a great way inferior. This I say not that 
I would that any man should make a God of Paul, con- 
trary unto his own learning. Notwithstanding, yet this 
manner of speaking is left unto us of our elders; that 
when we say the apostle saith so, we understand Paul, for 
his excellency above other apostles. I would he would 
tell you how Jerome, Augustine, Bede, Origen, and other 
doctors, expound this text, Upon this rock I will build my 
congregation: and how they interpret the keys also. 
Thereto, Pasce, pasce, pasce, which Rochester leaveth 
without any English, signifieth not poll, sheer, and shave. 
Upon which text behold the faithful Exposition of Bede. 

Note also how craftily he would enfeoff the apostles of 
Christ with their wicked traditions and false ceremonies, 
which they themselves have feigned; alleging Paul, 
2 Thess. ii. I answer, that Paul taught by mouth such 
things as he wrote in his Epistles. And his traditions 
were the gospel of Christ, and honest manners aud living, 
and such a good order as becometh the doctrine of Christ. 
As that a woman obey her husband, have her head covered, 
keep silence, and go womanly and Christianly apparelled; 
that children and servants be in subjection; and that the 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN
253 

young obey their elders, that no man eat but he that la- 
boureth, and worketh; and that men make an earnest 
thing of God's word, and of his holy Sacraments; and 
to watch, fast, and pray, and such like as the Scripture 
commandeth: which things, he that would break, were 
no Christian man. But, we may well complain, and 
cry to God for help, that it is not lawful for the pope's 
tyranny, to teach the people what prayer is, what fasting 
is, and wherefore it serveth. There were also certain 
customs alway, which were not commanded in pain of 
hell, or everlasting damnation: as to watch all night, 
and to kiss one another: which as soon as the people 
abused, then they brake them. For which cause, the 
bishops might break many things now in like manner. 
Paul also, in many things which God had made free, gave 
pure and faithful counsel, without tangling of any man's 
conscience, and without all manner [of] commanding, under 
pain of cursing, pain of excommunication, pain of heresy, 
pain of burning, pain of deadly sin, pain of hell, and 
pain of damnation. As thou mayest see, 1 Cor, vii., 
where he counselleth the unmarried, the widows, and vir- 
gins, that it is good so to abide, if they have the gift of 
chastity. Not to win heaven thereby, (for neither circum- 
cision, neither uncircumcision, is any thing at all; but the 
keeping of the commandments is altogether.) But that 
they might be without trouble, and might also the better 
wait on God's word, and freelier serve their brethren. And 
saith, (as a faithful servant) that he had none authority of 
the Lord, to give them any commandment. But, that the 
apostles gave us any blind ceremonies, whereof we should 
not know the reason, that I deny, and also defy, as a 
thing clean contrary unto the learning of Paul, everywhere. 

For Paul commandeth that no man once speak in the 
church (that is, in the congregation,) but in a tongue that all 
men understand, except that there be an interpreter by: 
he commandeth to labour for knowledge, understand- 
ing, and feeling, and to beware of superstition, and 

It h not 
lawful Tor 
us tu tfU 
wbnt pray- 
er lit, wluit 
rnstii)^ la, 
or where- 
fore it 31* r\'- 
eth. 

Riin of 
cursing, 
ilnmnatiunt 

fortU. 

If Paul luid 
noti*; au- 
thority, 
tlien Uad 
Peter nod*: 
where liiul 
then the 
pope this 
ELUthoriif ? 

Rochester 
is improT* 
ed. 


254
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Wlicr<-*foro 
the » jiiri * 

nre ordnhi- 

lierctics for 
Uts pur* 
pflflk% for 
lack of 
Scripture. 

RoLiiiljood 
IN nf nn- 
i liority 
enough to 
prove the 
I*jpe 

persuasions of worldly wisdom, philosophy, and of hypo- 
crisy and ceremonies, and of all manner [of] disguising, and 
to walk in the plain and open truth. Ye were once darkness, 
(saith he,) but now are ye light in the Lord; walk, there- 
fore, as the children of light. (Eph. v.) How doth Paul, 
also, wish them increase of grace in every Epistle! How 
crieth he to God to augment their knowledge, that they 
should be no more children, wavering with every wind of 
doctrine, but would vouchsafe to make them full men in 
Christ, and in the understanding of the mysteries or 
secrets of Christ! So that it should not be possible for 
any man to deceive them with any enticing reasons of 
worldly wisdom, or to beguile them with blind cere- 
monies, or to lead them out of the way with superstitious- 
ness of disguised hypocrisy. Unto which full knowledge 
are the spiritual officers ordained to bring them. (Eph. iv.) 
So far is it away that Christ's apostles should give them 
traditions of blind ceremonies, without signification, or of 
which no man should know the reason, as Rochester, 
which loveth shadows, and darkeneth, lieth on them: God 
stop his blasphemous mouth! 

Consider, also, how studiously Rochester allegeth 
Origen, both for his Pope, and also to stablish bis blind 
ceremonies withal: which Origen, of all heretics, is con- 
demned to be the greatest. He is an ancient doctor, 
saith he; yea, and to whom, in this point great faith is to 
be given. Yea, verily, Aristotle and Plato, and even very 
Robinhood, is to be believed in such a point, that so 
greatly maintaineth our holy father's authority, and all his 
disguisings. 

Last of all: as once a crafty thief, when he was espied 
and followed, cried unto the people, Stop the thief! Stop 
the thief! And as many to begin withal cast first in another 
man's teeth that which he feared should be laid to his own 
charge; even so Rochester layeth to Martin Luther's 
charge the slaying and murdering of Christian men, 
because they will not believe in his doctrine; which thing 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
255

Rochester and his brethren have not ceased to do now 
these certain hundred years, with such malice, that when 
they be dead, they rage, burning their bodies; of which 
some they themselves of likelihood killed before secretly. 
And because that all the world knoweth that Martin 
Luther slayeth no man, but killeth only with the spiritual 
sword, the word of God, such cankered consciences as 
Rochester hath; neither persecuteth, but suffereth per- 
secution; yet Rochester, with a goodly argument, proveth 
that he would do it if he could! And mark, I pray you, 
what an orator he is, and how vehemently he persuadeth 
it! Martin Luther hath burned the Pope's decretals; a 
manifest sign, saith he, that he would have burned the 
pope's holiness also, if he had had him. A like argu- 
ment (which I suppose to be rather true,) I make: Ro- 
chester and his holy brethren, have burnt Christ's Testa- 
ment; an evident sign, verily, that they would have burnt 
Christ himself; also, if they had had him! 

I had almost, verily, left out the chiefest point of all. 
Rochester, both abominable and shameless, yea, and stark 
mad with pure malice, and so adased in the brains with 
spite, that he cannot overcome the truth that he seeth not, 
or rather careth not what he saith; in the end of his first 
destruction, I would say instruction, as he calleth it; in- 
tending to prove that we are justified through holy works, 
allegeth half a text of Paul of the fifth to the Galatians, 
(as his manner is to juggle and convey craftily,) fides per 
dilectionem operans. Which text he thiswise Englisheth: 
Faith, which is wrought by love: and maketh a verb pas- 
sive of a verb deponent. Rochester will have love to go 
before, and faith to spring out of love. Thus Antichrist 
turneth the roots of the tree upward. I must first love a 
bitter medicine, (after Rochester's doctrine,) and then 
believe that it is wholesome. When, by natural reason, I 
first hate a bitter medicine, until I be brought in belief of 
the physician that it is wholesome, and that the bitterness 
shall heal me, and then afterward love it of that belief. 

orator. 

Eoelicstcr 

h clcAti 

hlttiM'lf, 

IfRiM?liei- 

wliiit sy|>- 
posc ye of 
tli£ rvftt ? 
L^l Ro- 

cljL'stcr be 

HD €^* 

ninple, 
Uiorpfor*, 

to jUtJ|{G 

tbejn all. 


256
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Fjuth 1ft the 
Tooi, and 
love 

springctb 
of failb. 

Rochester 

thtr spint 
tcj jiwlge 
ip I ritual 
tbingi, yet 
ought 
reason to 
htive kept 
liitt) from 
t<] fthameful 
lying. But 
Ggd bfitU 
blind rd 
him ti 
brill Ej I heir 
fiiUehoud 
lo light. 

Doth the child love the father first, and then believe that 
he is his son or heir? or rather, because be knoweth that 
he is his son or heir and beloved, therefore loveth again? 
John saith, in the third of his first Epistle, See what love 
the Father hath shewed upon us, that we should be called
his sons. Because we are sons, therefore love we. Now, 
by faith are we sons, as John saith in the first chapter of 
his gospel. He gave them power to be the sons of God, 
in that they believed on his name. And Paul saith, in 
the third chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians, We are 
all the sons of God, by the faith which is in Jesus Christ. 
And John, in the said chapter of his Epistle, saith, Hereby 
perceive we love, that he gave his life for us. We could 
see no love, nor cause to love again, except that we be- 
lieved that he died for us, and that we were saved through 
his death. And in the chapter following saith John. 
Herein is love: not that we loved God, but that he loved 
us, and sent his Son to make agreement for our sins. So 
God sent not his Son for any love that we had to him; 
but of the love that he had to us sent he his Son, that we 
might so love, and love again. Paul likewise, in the 
viiith chapter to the Romans, after that he hath declared 
the infinite love of God to usward, in that he spared not 
his own Son, but gave him for us, crieth out, saying, Who 
shall separate us from the love of God? Shall persecu- 
tion, shall a sword? &c. No, saith he; I am sure that 
no creature shall separate us from the love of God 
that is in Christ Jesus our Lord: as who should say, 
We see so great love in God to usward in Christ's 
death, that though all misfortune should fall on us, we
cannot but love again. Now how know we that God 
loveth us? Verily by faith. So therefore, though Ro- 
chester be a beast faithless, yet ought natural reason to
have taught him, that love springeth out of faith and 
knowledge; and not faith and knowledge out of love. 
But let us see the text. Paul saith thus: In Christ Jesus 
neither circumcision is any thing worth, nor uncircumcision, 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN. 
257

but faith which worketh through love; or which through 
love is strong or mighty in working, and not which is 
wrought by love, as the juggler saith. Faith that loveth 
God's commandments justifieth a man. If thou believe 
God's promises in Christ, and love his commandments, 
then art thou safe. If thou love the commandment, then 
art thou sure that thy faith is unfeigned, and that God's 
Spirit is in thee. 

How faith justifieth before God in the heart, and how 
love springeth of faith, and compelleth us to work, and 
how the works justify before the world, and testify what 
we are, and certify us that our faith is unfeigned, and that 
the right Spirit of God is in us, see in my book of the Jus- 
tifying of Faith, and there shalt thou see all thing abun- 
dantly. Also of the controversy between Paul and 
James see there. Neverthelater, when Rochester saith 
if faith only justified, then both the devils and also 
sinners that lie still in sin should be saved, his argument is 
not worth a straw. For neither the devils, nor yet sinners 
that continue in sin of purpose and delectation, have any 
such faith as Paul speaketh of. For Paul's faith is to 
believe God's promises. Faith (saith he Rom. x.) cometh 
by hearing, and hearing cometh by the word of God. 
And how shall they hear without a preacher, and how shall 
they preach except they be sent? As it is written (saith 
he) how beautiful are the feet that bring glad tidings of 
peace, and bring tidings of good things. Now when 
sent God any messengers unto the devils to preach them 
peace, or any good thing? The devil hath no promise; 
he is therefore excluded from Paul's faith. The devil 
believeth that Christ died, but not that he died for his sins. 
Neither doth any that consenteth in the heart to continue 
in sin, believe that Christ died for him. For to believe 
that Christ died for us, is to see our horrible damnation, 
and how we were appointed unto eternal pains, and to feel, 
and to be sure that we are delivered therefrom through 
Christ: in that we have power to hate our sins, and to 

VOL. II.

Tlie con* 
Imvtrrsy 

betMI'C-t:;!! 

Jnnirs a^ud 
PiiuL 

Wliy (JcHls 
liave nane 
of Faul'i 
fftUh, nar 
elfinert 

not. 

A taAn triAy 
Ijclievc tlmt 
Climt ilicJ 
and many 
other 

things, Mnil 
not belu'Vi 
ID ClirisL 

\V\m it li 
to helkir« 

lo 

Chriit. 


258
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

love God's commandments. All such repent and have 
their hearts loosed out of captivity and bondage of sin, 
and are therefore justified through faith in Christ. Wicked 
sinners have no faith, but imaginations and opinions about 
Christ; as our schoolmen have in their principles, about 
which they brawl so fast one with another. It is another 
thing to believe that the king is rich, and that he is rich 
unto me, and that my part is therein: and that he will not 
spare a penny of his riches at my need. When I believe that 
the king is rich, I am not moved. But when I believe 
that he is rich for me, and that he will never fail me at my 
need, then love I, and of love am ready to work unto the 
uttermost of my power. But let us return at the last 
unto our purpose again. 

What is the cause that lay men cannot now rule, as 
well as in times past, and as the Turks yet do? Verily 
because that antichrist with the mist of his juggling hath 
beguiled our eyes, and hath cast a superstitious fear upon 
the world of Christian men, and hath taught them to 
dread not God and his word, but himself and his word; 
not God's law and ordinances, princes and officers which 
God hath set to rule the world, but his own law and ordi- 
nances, traditions and ceremonies, and disguised disciples, 
which he hath set every where to deceive the world, and 
to expel the light of God's word that his darkness may 
have room. For we see by daily experience of certain 
hundred years long, that he which feareth neither God nor 
his word, neither regardeth father, mother, master, or 
Christ himself; which rebelleth against God's ordinances, 
riseth against the kings, and resisteth his officers, dare not 
once lay hands on one of the pope's anointed: no, though 
he slay his father before his face, or do violence unto his 
brother, or defile his sister, wife or mother. Like honour 
give we unto his traditions and ceremonies. What devo- 
tion have we when we are blessed (as they call it) with the 
chalice, or when the bishop lifteth up his holy hand over 


TYNDALE.
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
259

us? Who dare handle the chalice, touch the altar stone, 
or put his hand in the font, or his finger into the holy 
oil? What reverence give we unto holy water, holy fire, 
holy bread, holy salt, hallowed bells, holy wax, holy 
boughs, holy candles, and holy ashes! And last of all unto 
the holy candle commit we our souls at our last departing. 
Yea, and of the very clout which the bishop or his chap- 
lain that standeth by, knitteth about children's necks at 
confirmation, what lay person dare be so bold as to un- 
loose the knot? Thou wilt say, do not such things bring 
the Holy Ghost and put away sin and drive away spirits? 
I say that a steadfast faith, or belief in Christ and in the 
promises that God hath sworn to give us for his sake, 
bringeth the Holy Ghost as all the Scriptures make men- 
tion, and as Paul saith (Acts xix.) Have ye received the 
Holy Ghost through faith, or believing? Faith is the 
rock whereon Christ buildeth his congregation, against 
which saith Christ, (Matt. xvi.) hell gates shall not prevail. 
As soon as thou believest in Christ, the Holy Ghost 
cometh, sin falleth away, and devils fly. When we cast 
holy water at the devil, or ring the bells, he fleeth, as men 
do from young children, and mocketh with us, to bring 
us from the true faith that is in God's word, unto a super- 
stitious, and a false belief of our own imagination. If 
thou hadst faith and threwest an unhallowed stone at 
his head, he would earnestly flee, and without mocking; 
yea though thou threwest nothing at all, he would not yet 
abide. 

Though that at the beginning miracles were shewed 
through such ceremonies, to move the infidels to believe 
the word of God; as thou readest how the apostles 
anointed the sick with oil, and healed them, and Paul sent 
his pertelet or gyrkyn to the sick and healed them also; 
yet was it not the ceremony that did the miracle, but 
faith of the preacher and the truth of God, which had 
promised to confirm, and stablish his gospel with such 
miracles. Therefore as soon as the gift of miracles 

*Jnreth tlie 
devils 

Why do 
not ttie bl- 
stIio}i9 mjikc 
him flee 
from shoot- 
ing of guns? 

did not the 
niirnde, 
but faith. 


260
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

L«t ihcin 
tell wbat 
the ceremo- 
ny liveiiti- 

TUf priest 
witb lUe 
pnihiiOH i>r 
Christ. 

Dumb ec* 
rip*mantea 
qui^nch 
ffiitti nad 
lo^^i and 
niiikc the 
Infidels Co 
mock us. 

phcCT of 
Cbriit ii 

Ttte TcstA- 
ment of the 
obiervun- 
ces. 

ceased, ought the ceremony to have ceased also; or else if 
they needs will have a ceremony to signify some promise 
or benefit of God (which I praise not, but would have 
God's Word preached every Sunday, for which intent Sun- 
days and holy days were ordained) then let them tell the 
people what it meaneth; and not set up a bald and a 
naked ceremony without signification, to make the people 
believe therein, and to quench the faith that ought to be 
given unto the word of God. 

What helpeth it also that the priest when he goeth to 
mass disguiseth himself with a great part of the passion 
of Christ, and playeth out the rest under silence, with 
signs and proffers, with nodding, becking and mowing, 
as it were jackanapes, when neither he himself, neither any 
man else wotteth what he meaneth? not at all verily, but 
hurteth, and that exceedingly. Forasmuch as it not only 
destroyeth the faith, and quencheth the love that should be 
given unto the commandments, and maketh the people 
unthankful, in that it bringeth them into such superstition, 
that they think that they have done abundantly enough for 
God, yea, and deserved above measure if they be present 
once in a day at such mumming: but also maketh the 
infidels to mock us and abhor us, in that they see nothing 
but such apes' play among us, whereof no man can give 
a reason. 

All this cometh to pass to fulfil the prophesy which 
Christ prophesied. (Mark xiii. and Luke xxi.) That 
there shall come in his name which shall say that they 
themselves are Christ. That do verily the Pope and our 
holy orders of religion. For they under the name of Christ, 
preach themselves, their own word and their own tradi- 
tions, and teach the people to believe in them. The pope 
giveth pardons of his full power, of the treasure of the 
church, and of the merits of saints. The friars likewise 
make their benefactors (which only they call their brethren 
and sisters,) partakers of their masses, fasting, watchings, 
prayings, and woolward goings. Yea, and when a novice 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
261

of the observants is professed, the father asketh him, 
Will ye keep the rules of holy St. Francis? and he saith 
Yea. Will ye so in deed? saith he; the other answereth, 
Yea, forsooth, father. Then saith the father, And I 
promise you again everlasting life. O, blasphemy! If 
eternal life be due unto the pilled traditions of lousy friars, 
where is the Testament become that God made unto us 
in Christ's blood? Christ saith, (Matt. xxiv. and Mark 
xiii.) That there shall come pseudo-Christi; which, 
though I for a consideration have translated false Christs, 
keeping the Greek word, yet signifieth it in the English, 
false anointed, and ought so to be translated. There 
shall come (saith Christ,) false anointed, and fake pro- 
phets, and shall do miracles and wonders; so greatly, that 
if it were possible, the very elect, or chosen, should be 
brought out of the way. Compare the pope's doctrine 
unto the word of God, and thou shalt find that there hath 
been, and yet is, a great going out of the way; and that 
evil men and deceivers (as Paul prophesied 2 Tim. iii.) 
have prevailed, and waxed worse and worse, beguiling 
other as they are beguiled themselves. Thou tremblest 
and quakest, saying, Shall God let us go so sore out of 
the right way? I answer, It is Christ that warneth us; 
which, as he knew all that should follow, so prophesied 
he before, and is a true prophet, and his prophecies must 
needs be fulfilled. 

God anointed his Son Jesus with the Holy Ghost, and Christ and 
therefore called him Christ; which is as much to say as 
anointed. Outwardly he disguised him not, but made 
him like other men, and sent him into the world to bless 
us, and to offer himself for us a sacrifice of a sweet savour, 
to kill the stench of our sins, that God henceforth should 
smell them no more, nor think on them any more; and to 
make full and sufficient satisfaction, or amends, for all 
them that repent, believing the truth of God, and sub- 
mitting themselves unto his ordinances, both for the sins 


262
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Hl' thnt 
dot!) A u gilt 
to m^ke 
or to gel 
hiith bat 
liU pmrt of 
Christ's 
bluod. 

To OUT 
iicjghbiHir 
mnkc wu 
ainewda* 

Tlic Apos- 
tle* were 
neither 
vharen nor 
ihnrn, nor 
anomtod 
with oil. 

BUtbop, ao 
OTcnwer. 

Tbetnw 
of a priest, 

that they do, have done, and shall do. For sin we through 
fragility never so oft, yet as soon as we repent and come 
into the right way again, and unto the Testament which 
God hath made in Christ's blood, our sins vanish away 
as smoke in the wind, and as darkness at the coming of 
light; or as thou castest a little blood or milk into the main 
sea. Insomuch, that whosoever goeth about to make 
satisfaction for his sins to Godward, saying in his heart, 
This much have I sinned, this much will I do again; or 
this wise will I live to make amends withal; or this will I 
do to get heaven withal; the same is an infidel, faithless, 
and damned in his deed-doing, and hath lost his part in 
Christ's blood: because he is disobedient unto God's 
Testament, and setteth up another of his own imagina- 
tion, unto which he will compel God to obey. If we 
love God, we have a commandment to love our neighbour 
also, as saith John in his Epistle. And if we have offended 
him, to make him amends; or if we have not wherewith, 
to ask him forgiveness, and to do and suffer all things for 
his sake; to win him to God, and to nourish peace and 
unity: but to Godward, Christ is an everlasting satisfac- 
tion, and ever sufficient. 

Christ when he had fulfilled bis course, anointed his 
apostles and disciples with the same spirit, and sent them 
forth, without all manner [of] disguising, like other men 
also, to preach the atonement and peace which Christ had 
made betwen God and man. The apostles likewise dis- 
guised no man, but chose men anointed with the same 
spirit: one to preach the word of God, whom we call 
after the Greek tongue, a bishop or a priest; that is, in 
English, an overseer and an elder. How he was anointed, 
thou readest, (1 Tim. iii.) A bishop or an overseer must 
be faultless, the husband of one wife. (Many Jews, and 
also Gentiles, that were converted unto the faith, had at 
that time divers wives, yet were not compelled to put any 
of them away; which Paul, because of ensample, would 
not have preachers, forasmuch as in Christ we return 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
263

again unto the first ordinance of God, that one man and 
one woman should go together) he must be sober, of 
honest behaviour, honestly apparelled, harborous; that is, 
ready to lodge strangers; apt to teach, no drunkard, 
no fighter, not given to filthy lucre; but gentle, ab- 
horring fighting, abhorring covetousness, and one that 
ruleth his own household honestly, having children under 
obedience, with all honesty. For if a man cannot rule his 
own house, how can he care for the congregation of God? 
He may not be young in the faith: or as a man would 
say, a novice, lest he swell and fall into the judgment of 
the evil speaker; that is, he may not be unlearned in the 
secrets of the faith. For such are at once stubborn, and 
headstrong, and set not a little by themselves. But alas, 
we have above twenty thousand that know no more Scrip- 
ture than is written in their portesses, and among them is 
he exceeding well learned that can turn to his service. 
He must be well reported of them that are without, lest 
he fall into rebuke, and into the snare of the evil speaker; 
that is, lest the iniidels which yet believe not, should be 
hurt by him, and driven from the faith, if a man that were 
defamed were made head or overseer of the congregation. 

He must have a wife for two causes; one, that it may 
thereby be known who is meet for the room. He is unapt 
for so chargeable an office, which had never household to 
rule. Another cause is, that chastity is an exceeding 
seldom gift, and unchastity exceeding perilous for that 
degree. Inasmuch as the people look as well unto the 
living as unto the preaching, and are hurt at once, if the 
living disagree, and fall from the faith, and believe not 
the word. 

This overseer, because he was taken from his own 
business and labour, to preach God's word unto the 
parish, hath right by the authority of his office, to chal- 
lenge an honest living of the parish, as thou mayest see 
in the Evangelists, and also in Paul. For who will have 
a servant, and will not give him meat, drink, and raiment, 

Tliia oil is 
not nrnoii^ 
our Ui- 
sUopE. 

PrieiU 
ought to 
hare wivt?ii, 
and why- 

Wbiil tbe 
priest's 
duty Is to 
do : And 
wtiat to 
liave. 


264
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Men are 
not boiitid 
to pay the 
pnPBl in 
iHliL^E, by 
God'b Inw. 

D#lieon» 
what it &i|r- 
uilictb, nnd 
wlint is htfl 
office. 

No btg- 

How h#ly 
(Up and 
otTc rirtga 
came up. 

SnitiU 
were not 
yet Godi- 

Why lands 
were given 
uijto tbe 
Gfiiritiia] 
ofllcc'fa be- 
fore WE fell 
from tbe 
faiib. 

and all things necessary? How they would pay him, 
whether in money, or assign him so much rent, or in 
tithes, as the guise is now in many countries, was at their 
liberty. 

Likewise in every congregation chose they another after 
the same ensample, and even so anointed, as it is to see 
in the said chapter of Paul, and Acts vi. Whom after 
the Greek word we call deacon; that is to say in English, 
a servant or a minister, whose office was to help and as- 
sist the priest, and to gather up his duty, and to gather for 
the poor of the parish, which were destitute of friends, 
and could not work: common beggars to run from door 
to door, were not then suffered. On the saints' days, 
namely, such as had suffered death for the word sake, 
came men together into the church, and the priest preached 
unto them, and exhorted them to cleave fast unto the word, 
and to be strong in the faith, and to fight against the 
powers of the world, with suffering for their faith's sake, 
after the ensample of the saints. And taught them not to 
believe in the saints, and to trust in their merits, and to 
make gods of them: but took the saints for an ensample 
only, and prayed God to give them like faith and trust 
in his word, and like strength and power to suffer there- 
fore, and to give them so sure hope of the life to come, as 
thou mayest see in the collects of St. Lawrence and of St. 
Stephen, in our lady matins. And in such days, as we 
now offer, so gave they every man his portion according 
to his ability; and as God put in his heart, to the main- 
tenance of the priest, deacon, and other common minis- 
ters, and of the poor, and to find learned men to teach, 
and so forth. And all was put in the hands of the deacon, 
as thou mayest see in the life of St. Lawrence, and in the 
histories. And for such purposes gave men lands after- 
wards, to ease the parishes; and made hospitals, and also 
places to teach their children, and to bring them up, and 
to nurture them in God's word; which lands our monks 
now devour. 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
265

ANTICHRIST.

ANTICHRIST of another manner hath sent forth his 
disciples, those false anointed of which Christ warneth 
us before, that they should come and show miracles and 
wonders, even to bring the very elect out of the way, if it 
were possible. He anointeth them after the manner of 
the Jews, and shaveth them and sheareth them after the 
manner of the heathen priests, which serve the idols. He 
sendeth them forth not with false oil only, but with false 
names also. For compare their names unto their deeds, 
and thou shalt find them false. He sendeth them forth, 
as Paul prophesied of them, (2 Thess. ii.) with lying signs 
and wonders. What sign is the anointing? that they 
be full of the Holy Ghost. Compare them to the signs 
of the Holy Ghost which Paul reckoneth, and thou shalt 
find it a false sign. A bishop must he faultless, the hus- 
band of one wife. Nay, saith the pope, the husband of 
no wife, but the holder of as many whores as he listeth. 
God commandeth all degrees, if they burn, and cannot live 
chaste, to marry. The pope saith, If thou burn, take a 
dispensation for a concubine, and put her away when thou 
art old, or else, as our lawyers say, Si non caste, tamen 
caute; that is, If ye live not chaste, see ye carry clean, and 
play the knave secretly. Harbourous, yea to whores and 
bauds; for a poor man shall as soon break his neck as his 
fast with them, but of the scraps and with the dogs, when 
dinner is done. Apt to teach, and as Peter saith, (1 Pet. ii.) 
Ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh 
you a reason of the hope that ye have, and that with meek- 
ness. Which thing is signified by the boots which doctors 
of divinity are created in, because they should be ready 
always to go through thick and thin, to preach God's word, 
and by the bishop's two-horned mitre, which betokeneth 
the absolute and perfect knowledge that they ought to 

Fulse H' 
iioi-iti'd. 

Stiavlni^ is 
borrowed 
of Ill€ ll(^«- 
UicDf aiml 
mViag nf 
Ibe Jews, 

No wife 
but an 
whore. 

Take a dia- 
j:»erimtion. 

BooUt. 

Mitres* 


266
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Lliem. 

All in La- 
tiiv. 

Roll tli«iii. 

Sifig. 

Ring-. 

LuH til em- 

Rock them 
a-sleep. 

have in the new Testament and the old. Be not these 
false signs? For they beat only, and teach not. Yea 
saith the pope, If they will not be ruled, cite them to 
appear, and pose them sharply, what they hold of the 
pope's power, of his pardons, of his bulls, of purgatory, 
of ceremonies, of confession, and such like creatures of 
our most holy father's. If they miss in any point, make 
heretics of them, and burn them. If they be of mine an- 
ointed, and bear my mark, disgrace them, I would say dis- 
graduate them, and (after the ensample of noble Antiochus, 
2 Mach. vii.) pare the crowns and the fingers of them, 
and torment them craftily, and for very pain make them 
deny the truth. But now say our bishops, because the 
truth is come too far abroad, and the lay people begin to 
smell our wills, it is best to oppress them with craft se- 
cretly, and to tame them in prison. Yea, let us find the 
means to have them in the king's prison, and to make 
treason of such doctrine: yea, we must stir up some war 
one where or another, to bring the people into another 
imagination. If they be gentlemen, abjure them secretly. 

Curse them four times in the year. Make them afraid 
of every thing; and namely, to touch mine anointed; and 
make them to fear the sentence of the church, suspensions, 
excommunications and curses. Be they right or wrong, 
bear them in hand that they are to be feared yet. Preach 
me and mine authority, and how terrible a thing my curse 
is, and how black it maketh their souls. On the holidays, 
which were ordained to preach God's word, set up long 
ceremonies, long matins, long masses, and long even- 
songs, and all in Latin, that they understand not: and 
roll them in darkness, that ye may lead them whither 
ye will. And lest such things should be too tedious, sing 
some, say some, pipe some, ring the bells, and lull them 
and rock them asleep. And yet Paul (2 Cor. xiv.) for- 
biddeth to speak in the church or congregation, save in 
the tongue that all understand. For the layman thereby 
is not edified or taught. How shall the layman say Amen, 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
267

(saith Paul) to thy blessing or thanksgiving, when he 
wotteth not what thou sayest? He wotteth not whether 
thou bless or curse. 

What then saith the pope, What care I for Paul? I 
command by the virtue of obedience, to read the gospel 
in Latin, let them not pray but in Latin, no not their 
Pater noster. If any be sick, go also and say them 
a gospel, and all in Latin: yea, to the very corn and 
fruits of the field, in the procession week, preach the 
gospel in Latin, Make the people believe, that it shall 
grow the better. It is verily as good to preach it to swine 
as to men, if thou preach it in a tongue they understand 
not. How shall I prepare myself to God's command- 
ments? How shall I be thankful to Christ for his kind- 
ness? How shall I believe the truth and promises which 
God hath sworn, while thou tellest them unto me in a 
tongue which I understand not? 

What then saith my lord of Canterbury, to a priest 
that would have had the New Testament gone forth in 
English: What (saith he) wouldest thou that the lay- 
people should wete what we do? 

No fighter, which I suppose is signified by the cross 
that is borne before the high prelates, and borne before 
them in procession: Is that also not a false sign? What 
realm can be in peace for such turmoilers? What so 
little a parish is it, but they will pick one quarrel or 
another with them, either for some surplus, chrism or 
mortuary, either for one trifle or other, and cite them to 
the arches? Traitors they are to all creatures, and have 
a secret conspiration between themselves. One craft they 
have, to make many kingdoms, and small, and to nourish 
old titles or quarrels, that they may ever move them to 
war at their pleasure. And if much lands, by any chance, 
fall to one man, ever to cast a bone in the way, that he 
shall never be able to obtain it, as we now see in the 
emperor. Why? For as long as the kings be small, if 
God would open the eyes of any to set a reformation in 

Prny lit 

Say thpin n 
gospel. 

Whftt 
quocb my 
Lord of 
Cftdtcrbw- 

Cross. 

Turnioi- 

TliC cruft 
of ihe prc- 


268
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

iDterdicU 

ntsrer to 
school at 
the ardiQa. 

The Pope 
li^th one 
kingdom 
Tiiore tban 
God Llni- 

Kir. 

Sharing 
w)mt it liig- 
nifictbi 

Tot quot 

tlml preach 

QOtt 

his realm, then should the Pope interdict his land, and 
send in other princes to conquer it. 

Not given to filthy lucre, but abhorring covetousness. 
And as Peter saith, (1 Pet. v.) Taking the oversight of 
them, not as though ye were compelled thereunto; but 
willingly. Not for desire of filthy lucre, but of a good 
mind: not as though ye were lords over the parishes, (over 
the parishes, quoth he) O Peter, Peter, thou wast too 
long a fisher, thou wast never brought up at the arches, 
neither wast master of the Rolls, nor yet Chancellor of 
England. They are not content to reign over king and 
emperor, and the whole earth: but challenge authority 
also in heaven and in hell. It is not enough for them to 
reign over all that are quick, but have created them a 
a purgatory, to reign also over the dead, and to have one 
kingdom more than God himself hath. But that ye be 
an ensample to the flock; (saith Peter) and when the 
chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an incor- 
ruptible crown of glory. This abhorring of covetousness 
is signified, as I suppose, by shaving and shearing of the 
hair, that they have no superfluity. But is not this also 
a false sign? Yea, verily, it is to them a remembrance 
to shear and shave, to heap benefice upon benefice, pro- 
motion upon promotion, dignity upon dignity, bishoprick 
upon bishoprick, with pluralities, unions and tot quots. 

First, by the authority of the gospel, they that preach 
the word of God in every parish, and other necessary 
ministers, have right to challenge an honest living like 
unto one of the brethren, and therewith ought to be con- 
tent. Bishops and priests that preach not, or that preach 
ought save God's word, are none of Christ's, nor of his 
anointing: but servants of the beast, whose mark they 
bear, whose word they preach, whose law they maintain 
clean against God's law, and with their false sophistry give 
him greater power than God ever gave to his son Christ. 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
269

But they, as unsatiable beasts, not unmindful why they 
were shaven and shorn, because they will stand at no man's 
grace, or be in any man's danger, have gotten into their 
own hands, first the tithe or tenth of all the realm. Then 
I suppose within a little, or altogether the third foot of 
all the temporal lands. 

Mark well how many parsonages or vicarages are there 
in the realm, which at the least have a plow-land a-piece. 
Then note the lands of bishops, abbots, priors, nuns, 
knights of St. John's, cathedral churches, colleges, 
chauntries and free-chapels. For though the house fall 
in decay, and the ordinance of the founder be lost, yet 
will not they loose the lands. What cometh once in, may 
never more out. They make a free-chapel of it, so that 
he which enjoyeth it shall do nought therefore. Besides 
all this, how many chaplains do gentlemen find at their 
own cost in their houses? How many sing for souls by 
testaments? Then the proving of testaments, the prizing 
of goods, the bishop of Canterbury's prerogative. Is that 
not much through the realm in a year? Four offering 
days and privy tithes. There is no servant, but that he 
shall pay somewhat of his wages. None shall receive 
the body of Christ at Easter, be he never so poor a 
beggar, or never so young a lad or maid, but they must 
pay somewhat for it. Then mortuaries for forgotten tithes 
(as they say). And yet what parson or vicar is there that 
will forget to have a pigeon-house, to peck up some- 
what both at sowing-time and harvest, when corn is ripe? 
They will forget nothing. No man shall die in their 
debt; or if any man do, he shall pay it when he is dead. 
They will lose nothing. Why? It is God's; it is not 
theirs. It is St. Hubert's rents, St. Alban's lands, St. 
Edmond's right, St. Peter's patrimony, say they, and none 
of ours. Item if a man die in another man's parish, be- 
sides that he must pay at home a mortuary for forgotten 
tithes, he must there pay also the best that he there hath. 
Whether it be an horse of twenty pound, or how good 

Tithes. 

Temporal 

Freechnp- 
pel. 

dityi. 
Prirytittiefi 

Mortutin^s. 

Thou must 
pay ere 

If he die 


270
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Petty prl- 

CoufrKSion. 

First Muss* 
Profcaa- 
Cofijiirati* 
acts. 

P»r«m, 
Vicflr. 
Puriih 
prieat. 
Friari* 

Spi ritual 
Uir. 

A proper 
commodi* 
ty of con- 

soever he be: either a chain of gold of an hundred 
marks, or five hundred pounds, if it so chance. It is 
much, verily, for so little pains taken in confession, and 
in ministering the sacraments. Then bead-rolls. Item 
christenings, churchings, banns, weddings, offering at wed- 
dings, offering at buryings, offering to images, offering of wax 
and lights, which come to their damage; besides the super- 
stitious waste of wax in torches and tapers throughout 
the land. Then brotherhoods and pardoners. What get 
they also by confessions? Yea, and many enjoin penance, 
to give a certain [sum] for to have so many masses said, and 
desire to provide a chaplain themselves. Soul-masses, 
dirges, month-minds, peace-minds, All-souls-duy and 
trentals. The mother church and the high altar must 
have somewhat in every testament. Offerings at priests' 
first masses. Item no man is professed, of whatsoever 
religion it be; but he must bring somewhat. The hal- 
lowing, or rather conjuring of churches, chapels, altars, 
super-altars, chalice, vestments and bells. Then book, 
bell, candlestick, organs, chalice, vestments, copes, altar- 
cloths, surplices; towels, basins, ewers, sheep, censer, 
and all manner [of] ornaments, must be found them freely, 
they will not give a mite thereunto. Last of all, what 
swarms of begging friars are there! The parson sheareth, 
the vicar shaveth, the parish priest polleth, the friar 
scrapeth, and the pardoner pareth; we lack but a butcher 
to pull off the skin. 

What get they in their spiritual law as (they call it) in a 
year, at the arches and in every diocese? what get the com- 
missaries, and officials with their somners and apparitors 
by bawdery in a year? shall ye not find curates enough 
which to flatter the commissaries and officials withal, that 
they may go quit themselves, shall open unto them the 
confessions of the richest of their parishes: whom they 
cite privily, and lay to their charges secretly. If they de- 
sire to know their accusers, Nay, say they, the matter is 
known well enough, and to more than ye are ware of. 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
271

Come lay your hand on the book, if ye forswear yourself,
we shall bnng proofs, we will handle you, we will make
an ensample of you. Oh how terrible are they! Come, and 
swear, say they that you will be obedient unto our injunc- 
tions. And by that craft wring they their purses, and 
make them drop as long as there is a penny in them. In 
three or four years shall they in those offices get enough to 
pay for a bishop's bull. What other thing are these in a 
realm save horse-leeches, and even very maggots, cankers, 
and caterpillars, which devour no more but all that is green; 
and those wolves which Paul prophesied should come and 
should not spare the flock. (Acts xxth chapter.) And 
which Christ said should come in lamb's skins, and bade us 
beware of them and judge them by their works. 

Though as I have before sufficiently proved, a chris-
tian man must suffer all things, be it never so great unright,
as long as it is not against God's commandment, neither is
it lawful for him to cast any burden off his back by his
own authority, till God pull it off, which laid it on for our
deservings, yet ought the kings everywhere to defend their 
realms from such oppression, if they were christians, which 
is seldom seen: and is an hard thing, verily, though not im- 
possible. For alas! they be captives or ever they be kings, 
yea almost ere they be born. No man may be suffered 
about him but flatterers, and such as are first sworn true 
unto our most holy fathers the bishops, that is to say, false 
to God and man. 

If any of the nobles of the realm be true to the king, 
and so bold that he dare counsel him that which should be 
to his honour and for the wealth of the realm; they will 
wait a season for him as men say, they will provide a 
ghostly father for him. God bring their wickedness to 
light. There is no mischief whereof they are not the root, 
nor bloodshed but through their cause either by their coun- 
sel, or in that they preach not true obedience, and teach 
not the people to fear God. If any faithful servant be in 

King^ are 
in capti- 
Tity. 


272
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

The* duty of 

nughc to be 
brokc^Hi 
and mny 
wttboiit 
ilispeoaii- 

'file kUifr 
only ought 
to pijubli 
ulii t ] mean 
tUat is bro- 
ken fcrtli. 
Tbe lienrt 
ini!ist re* 
God, 

pcrfninetU 
«nt<5 tbc 
only. 

all the court, he shall have twenty spies waiting upon him, 
he shall be cast out of the court, or, as the saying is, con- 
veyed to Calais, and made a captain or an ambassador, he 
shall be kept far enough from the king's presence. 

The kings ought, I say, to remember that they are in 
God's stead, and ordained of God, not for themselves, but 
for the wealth of their subjects. Let them remember that 
their subjects are their brethren, their flesh and blood, 
members of their own body, and even their ownselves in 
Christ. Therefore ought they to pity them and to rid 
them from such vile tyranny which increaseth more and 
more daily. And though that the kings by the false- 
hood of the bishops and abbots be sworn to defend such li- 
berties: yet ought they not to keep their oaths, but to 
break them. Forasmuch as they are unright and clean 
against God's ordinance, and even but cruel oppression, 
contrary unto brotherly love and charity. Moreover the 
spiritual officer ought to punish no sin, but and if any sin 
break out, the king is ordained to punish it, and they not: 
but to preach and exhort them to fear God, and that they 
sin not. 

And let the kings put down some of their tyranny, and 
turn some unto a commonwealth. If the tenth part of 
such tyranny were given the king yearly, and laid up in the 
shire towns against the realm had need, what would it grow 
to in certain years? Moreover one king one law, is God's 
ordinance in every realm. Therefore ought not the king to 
suffer them to have a several law by themselves, and to 
draw his subjects thither. It is not mete, will they say 
that a spiritual man should be judged by a worldly or tem- 
poral man. O abomination, see how they divide and se- 
parate themselves: if the lay men be of the world, so is he 
not of God! If he believe in Christ, then is he a member 
of Christ, Christ's brother, Christ's flesh, Christ's blood, 
Christ's spouse, coheir with Christ, and hath his Spirit 
in earnest, and is also spiritual. If they would rob us of 
the Spirit of God, why should they fear to rob us of 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
273

worldly goods? because thou art put in office to preach 
God's word, art thou therefore no more one of the 
brethren? is the major of London no more one of the city 
because he is the chief officer? is the king no more of the 
realm because he is head thereof? The king is in the room 
of God, and his law is God's law, and nothing but the law 
of nature and natural equity, which God graved in the 
hearts of men. Yet antichrist is too good to be judged 
by the law of God, he must have a new of his own making. 
It were meet verily that they went to no law at all. No 
more needed they, if they would study to preach God's word 
truly, and be contented with sufficient, and to be like one 
of their brethren. 

If any question arose about the faith of the Scripture, that 
let them judge by the manifest and open Scriptures, not 
excluding the lay men. For there are many found among 
the lay men, which are as wise as the officers. Or else 
when the officer dieth, how could we put another in his 
room? wilt thou so teach twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty 
years, that no man shall have knowledge or judgment in 
God's word save thou only? is it not a shame that we 
Christians come so oft to church in vain, when he of four- 
score years old knoweth no more than he that was born 
yesterday? 

Moreover, when the spiritual officers have excom- 
municated any man, or have condemned any opinion for 
heresy: let not the king nor temporal officers punish and 
slay by and by at their commandment. But let them look 
on God's word and compare then judgment unto the Scrip- 
ture, and see whether it be right or no, and not believe 
them at the first chop, whatsoever they say, namely, in 
things that pertain unto their own authorities and power. 
For no man is a right judge in his own cause. Why doth 
Christ command the Scripture to be preached unto all 
creatures, but that it pertaineth unto all men to know 
them? Christ referreth himself unto the Scriptures; (John 
v.) and in the xith chapter of Matthew, unto the question 

VOL II. T 

Hnw tnea 
OUf[llt 
to jujIktc 
qtiealtoiiiS 
of the 
Scrip t HI i?* 

We come 
oft to sc Lool 
but tre ne- 
ver UugUE. 

Kings 
iHiglit Id 
ii»e whAt 
tbf f do, 
«nd nni lo 
believe the 
namely, 
M^'ing theSr 
lirin^ U so 
sore Sii%' 
peclt 

It pertjijD- 
eth tmta all 
men to 
ktiotr the 


274
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

yc that 
ju%e the 

nfe lieiaine 
b4ngift(!ii^ 

of John Baptist's disciples, he answered, The blind see, the 
lepers are cleansed, the dead arise again, &c. meaning that 
if I do the works which are prophesied that Christ should 
do when he cometh, why doubt ye whether I be he or no? 
as who should say, Ask the Scripture whether I be Christ or 
no, and not myself. How happeneth it then that our pre- 
lates will not come to the light also, that we may see whe- 
ther their works be wrought in God or no? why fear they 
to let the lay men see what they do? why make they all their 
examinations in darkness? why examine they not their 
causes of heresy openly, as the lay men do their felons, and 
murderers? wherefore did Christ and his apostles also 
warn us so diligently of Antichrist and of false prophets 
that should come? because that we should slumber or 
sleep careless, or rather that we should look in the light of 
the Scripture with all diligence to spy them when they came, 
and not to suffer ourselves to be deceived and led out of the 
way? John biddeth judge the spirits. Whereby shall we 
judge them but by the Scriptures? how shalt thou know 
whether the prophet be true or false, or whether he speak 
God's word of his own head, if thou wilt not see the Scrip- 
tures? why said David in the second Psalm, Be learned ye 
that judge the earth, lest the Lord be angry with you, and 
ye perish from the right way?

A terrible warning verily: yea, and look on the stories 
well, and thou shalt find very few kings since the beginning 
of the world that have not perished from the right way, and 
that because they would not be learned. 

The emperor and kings are nothing now a days but even 
hangmen unto the pope and bishops, to kill whosoever 
they condemn without any more ado, as Pilate was unto the 
Scribes and Pharisees and the high bishops to hang Christ. 
For as those prelates answered Pilate, (when be asked 
what he had done) if he were not an evil doer, we would 
not have brought him unto thee. As who should say, we 
are too holy to do any thing amiss, thou mayest believe us 
well enough: yea, and his blood on our heads said they, kill 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
275 

him hardly, we will bear the charge, our souls for thine: 
We have also a law by which he ought to die, for he calleth 
himself God's son. Even so say our prelates, he ought to 
die by our laws, he speaketh against the church. And 
your grace is sworn to defend the liberties and ordinances 
of the church and to maintain our most holy father's au- 
thority; our souls for yours, ye shall do a meritorious deed 
therein. Nevertheless as Pilate escaped not the judgment of 
God, even so is it to be feared lest our temporal powers shall 
not. Wherefore be learned ye that judge the earth, lest the 
Lord be angry with you and ye perish from the right way. 

Who slew the prophets? who slew Christ? who slew his 
apostles? who the martyrs and all the righteous that ever 
were slain? The kings and the temporal sword at the re- 
quest of the false prophets. They deserved such murder 
to do, and to have their part with the hypocrites, because 
they would not be learned, and see the truth themselves. 
Wherefore suffered the prophets? because they rebuked 
the hypocrites which beguiled the world, and namely prin- 
ces and rulers, and taught them to put their trust in things 
of vanity, and not in God's word. And taught them to do 
such deeds of mercy as were profitable unto no man but 
unto the false prophets themselves only, making merchan- 
dize of God's word. Wherefore slew they Christ? even 
for rebuking the hypocrites: because he said Woe be to 
you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye shut up the 
kingdom of heaven before men: (Matt. xxiii.) that is, as it 
is written Luke xi. Ye have taken away the key of know- 
ledge. The law of God which is the key wherewith men 
bind, and the promises which are the keys wherewith 
men loose, have our hypocrites also taken away. They 
will suffer no man to know God's word, but burn it and 
make heresy of it: yea, and because the people began to 
smell their falsehood, they make it treason to the king, and 
breaking of the king's peace to have so much as their pa- 
ternoster in English. And instead of God's law, they bind 
with their own law. And instead of God's promises, they 

Be li*iiroed 
ve lU«t 
Judge Ihe 

WLio ilrir 
tli(^ pro- 

IVlij were 
the pro- 
phets slnin I 

Wbat deeds 
of mercy 
teach the 
bypocrites? 

Why ilew 
theyClmsl? 

Tlic key*. 

Chflftt is A 
traiuir nnd 
a hreakrr 
of the 
L) file's 
pence* 


276
THE OBEDIENCE OF
TYNDALE.

Hnw the 
hvpocrltea 
bind luid 
Ion He. 

Be lenrticd 
yu tlinl 
JUflgl' tlic 

For n-buk* 
ing thi.4 
w<ts Cbnat 
slttin. And 
for tlie 

Si re wu- 
perieiiitt'd. 

They lie 
not a Little 
afriiid of 
purg-ntory 
lliat muke 
p*r|H*- 
t Ultima. 

Why it ia 
Cttlled jmr* 
g»lory. 

loose and justify with pardons aud ceremonies, which 
they themselves have imagined for their own profit. They 
preach, It were better for thee to eat flesh on good Friday, 
than to hate thy neighbour; but let any man eat flesh but 
on a Saturday, or break any other tradition of theirs, and 
he shall be bound, and not loosed, till he have paid the 
uttermost farthing, either with shame most vile, or death 
most cruel: but hate thy neighbour as much as thou wilt, 
and thou shalt have no rebuke of them; yea, rob him, 
murder him, and then come to them and welcome. They 
have a sanctuary for thee; to save thee; yea, aud a neck- 
verse, if thou canst but read a little Latin, though 
it be never so sorrily, so that you be ready to receive the 
beast's mark. They care for no understanding; it is 
enough if thou canst roll up a pair of matins, or an even- 
song, and mumble a few ceremonies. And because they 
be rebuked, this they rage. Be learned, therefore, ye 
that judge the world, lest God be angry with you, and ye 
perish from the right way. 

Woe be to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! saith 
Christ, (Matt. xxi.) for ye devour widows' houses under a 
colour of long prayer. Our hypocrites rob not the widows 
only, but knight, squire, lord, duke, king, and emperor, and 
even the whole world under the same colour; teaching 
the people to trust in their prayers and not in Christ, for 
whose sake God hath forgiven all the sin of the whole 
world unto as many as repent and believe. They fear, 
then, with purgatory, and promise to pray perpetually, lest 
the lands should ever return home again unto the right 
heirs. What hast thou bought with robbing thy heirs, 
or with giving the hypocrites that which thou robbest of 
other men? Perpetual prayer? Yea, perpetual pain. 
For they appoint thee no time of deliverance, their 
prayers are so mighty. The pope, for money, can empty 
purgatory when he will. It is, verily, purgatory; for it 
purgeth and maketh clean riddance: yea, it is hell, for it 
devoureth all things. His Fatherhood sendeth them to 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
277

heaven with scala cali; that is, with a ladder to scale the 
walls. For by the door, Christ, will they not let them 
come in. That door have they stopped up, and that 
because ye should buy ladders of them. For some they 
pray daily, which gave them perpetuities, and yet make 
saints of them, receiving offerings in their names, and 
teaching other to pray to them. None of them, also, 
which taketh upon them to save other with their prayers, 
trusteth to be saved thereby themselves, but hire other to 
pray for them. 

Moses taketh record of God, that he took not of any 
of the people no much as an ass, neither vexed any of 
them. (Numb. xvi.) Samuel, in the first book of Kings 
the xiith chapter, asked all Israel, Whether he had taken 
any man's ox, or ass; or had vexed any man, or had taken 
any gift or reward of any man? And all the people tes- 
tified Nay; yet these two both taught the people,and also 
prayed for them, as much as our prelates do. (Pet. i.) 
Peter (vth.) exhorteth the elders to take the oversight of 
Christ's flock, not for filthy lucre; but of a good will, 
even for love, Paul (Acts xx.) taketh the priests, or 
elders, to record, that he had taught repentance and faith, 
and all the counsel of God. And yet had desired no 
man's gold, silver, or vesture; but fed himself with the 
labour of his hands. And yet these two taught, and 
prayed for the people, as much as our prelates do, with 
whom it goeth after the common saying, No penny, no 
paternoster. Which prelates, yet as they teach not, but 
beat only, so wot they not what prayer meaneth. 

Moreover, the law of love, which Christ left among us, 
is to give, and not to receive. What prayer is it, then, 
that thus robbeth all the world, contrary to that great 
commandment, which is the end of all commandments, 
and in which all others are contained? If men should 
continue to buy prayer four or five hundred years more, 
as they have done, there would not be a foot of ground in 
Christendom, neither any worldly thing, which they, that 

Scalu Cicli. 

Thti daor 
is Sitoppcd 
tip: yc 
mu^t climb 
and scale 
tUe wnlts, 

*SoDie arc 
priiycd for 
Rntl penycd 
to alsEo^ 

The mdl 
that liclp-' 
ptb othiT 
hrlpeth not 
LiU own 
master. 

Prnycr waa 
not aolf] in 
itie did 

Tlifir 
Eraycr 
reakelli 
the ^T¥Jtt 
toiumanfl- 
meat of 
God. It is 
time that 
Lhey were 
lleiL up 
Llier<3fore. 


278
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

tleris of our 
«t»i ritual 

CtinfesRioR 
tonnpDtctii 
llie con- 

r^bbeth tbc 
jtiine of 
inqnc^y, 
arxJ Uie 
soul of 
futile 

will be called spiritual only, should not thus possess. 
And thus all should be called spiritual. 

Woe be to you lawyers! for ye lade men with burdens 
which they are not able to bear, and ye yourselves touch 
not the packs with one of your fingers, saith Christ. 
(Luke xi.) Our lawyers, verily, have laden us a thou- 
sand times more. What spiritual kindred have they 
made in baptism, to let matrimony? besides that, they 
have added certain degrees unto the law, natural for the 
same purpose. What an unbearable burthen of chastity 
do they violently thrust on other men's backs, and how 
easily bear they it themselves! How sore a burthen! 
How cruel a hangman! How grievous a torment! Yea, 
and how painful an hell is this ear-confession unto men's 
consciences! For the people are brought in belief, that 
without that they cannot be saved. Insomuch, that some 
fast certain days in the year, and pray certain superstitious 
prayers all their lives long, that they may not die without 
confession. In peril of death, if the priest be not by, the 
shipmen shrive themselves unto the mast. If any be 
present, they run then every man into his ear; but to 
God's promises fly they not, for they know them not. If 
any man have a death's wound, he crieth immediately for 
a priest. If a man die without shrift, many take it for a 
sign of damnation. Many, by reason of that false belief, 
die in desperation. Many, for shame, keep back of their 
confession twenty, thirty years, and think all the while 
that they be damned. I knew a poor woman with child 
which longed, and being overcome of her passion, ate 
flesh on a Friday, which thing she durst not confess in 
the space of eighteen years, and thought all that while 
that she had been damned, and yet sinned she not at all. 
Is not this a sore burden, that so weigheth down the soul 
unto the bottom of hell? What should I say? A great 
book were not sufficient to rehearse the snares which they 
have laid to rob men both of their goods, and also of the 
trust which they should have in God's word. 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
279

The Scribes and Pharisees do all their works to be 
seen of men. They set abroad their phylacteries, and 
make long borders on their garments, and love to sit 
uppermost at feasts, and to have the chief seats in the 
synagogues; that is, in the congregations or councils, 
and to be called Rabbi; that is to say, Masters, saith 
Christ. (Matt. xxiii.) Behold the deeds of our spiri- 
tualty and how many thousand fashions are among them 
to be known by? which, as none is like another, so loveth 
none another. For every one of them supposeth that all 
other poll too fast and make too many captives: yet to re- 
sist Christ are they all agreed, lest they should be all com- 
pelled to deliver up their prisoners to him. Behold the 
monsters, how they are disguised with mitres, crosiers, 
and hats: with crosses, pillars, and poleaxes; and with 
three crowns! What names have they? My Lord 
Prior, my Lord Abbot, my Lord Bishop, my Lord Arch- 
bishop, Cardinal, and Legate; If it please your Father- 
hood; If it please your Lordship; If it please your 
Grace; If it please your Holiness; and innumerable 
such like. Behold how they are esteemed, and how high 
they be crept up above all; not into worldly seats only, but 
into the seat of God, the hearts of men, where they sit 
above God himself. For both they, and whatsoever they 
make of their own heads, is more feared and dread than 
God and his commandments. In them and their deserv- 
ings put we more trust than in Christ, and his merits. To 
their promises give we more faith, than to the promises 
which God hath sworn in Christ's blood. 

The hypocrites say unto the kings and lords, These 
heretics would have us down first, and then you, to make 
of all common. Nay, ye hypocrites and right heretics, 
approved by open Scripture, the kings and lords are down 
already, and that so low, that they cannot go lower. Ye 
tread them under your feet, and lead them captive, and 
have made them your bond-servants to wait on your 
filthy lusts; and to avenge your malice on every man, 

Buga or 
bmiblea to 
he kdOWEt 
by. 

GloHnus 

they es- 
ie«iued ? 

Kin ^9 are 
down, they 
CHfinol ga 
lower. 


280
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

0«r liypo" 
by theft 

Cun- 
udedccs 
»{) tinrrow 
ftboiit trA- 
bnve wide 
Cod*» 
rouimand- 

contrary unto the right of God's word. Ye have not only 
robbed them of their land, authority, honour, and due 
obedience which ye owe unto them; but also of their 
wits, so that they are not without understanding in God's 
word only; but even in worldly matters, that pertain unto 
their offices, they are more than children. Ye bear them 
in hand what ye will, and have brought them even in case 
like unto them which, when they dance naked in nets, be- 
lieve they are invisible. We would have them up again, 
and restored unto the room and authority which God hath 
given them, and whereof ye have robbed them. And your 
inward falsehood we do but utter only with the light of 
God's word, that your hypocrisy might be seen. Be 
learned, therefore, ye that judge the world, lest God be 
angry with you, and ye peirish from the right way. 

Woe be to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! 
For ye make clean the utterside of the cup and of the 
platter, but within they are full of bribery and excess, 
saith Christ. (Matt. xxiii.) Is that which our hypocrites 
eat and drink, and all their riotous excess, any other thing 
save robbery, and that which they have falsely gotten with 
their lying doctrine? Be learned, therefore, ye that judge 
the world, and compel them to make restitution again. 

Ye blind guides, saith Christ, ye strain out a gnat and 
swallow a camel. (Matt. xxiii.) Do not our blind 
guides also stumble at a straw, and leap over a block, 
making narrow consciences at trifles, and at matters of 
weight none at all? If any of them happen to swallow 
his spittle, or any of the water wherewith he washed his 
mouth, ere he go to mass; or touch the Sacrament with 
his nose; or if the ass forget to breathe on him, or happen 
to handle it with any of his fingers which are not anointed; 
or say Alleuia instead of Laus tibi Domine; or Ite 
missa est instead of Benedicamus Domino; or pour too 
much wine in the chalice; or read the gospel without 
light; or make not his crosses aright, how trembleth he! 
How feareth he! What an horrible sin is committed! 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
281 

I cry God mercy, saith he, and you, my ghostly father. 
But to hold an whore, or another man's wife, to buy a 
benefice, to set one realm at variance with another, and to 
cause twenty thousand men to die on a day, is but a 
trifle and a pastime with them! 

The Jews boasted themselves of Abraham. And 
Christ said unto them, (John viii.) If ye were Abra- 
ham's children ye would do the deeds of Abraham. Our 
hypocrites boast themselves of the authority of Peter, and of 
Paul, and the other apostles, clean contrary unto the deeds 
and doctrine of Peter, Paul, and of all the other apostles; 
which both obeyed all worldly authority and power, 
usurping none to themselves, and taught all other to fear 
the kings and rulers, and to obey them in all things, not 
contrary to the commandment of God, and not to resist 
them, though they took away life and goods wrongfully; 
but patiently to abide God's vengeance. This did our 
spiritualty never yet, nor taught it. They taught not to 
fear God in his commandments, but to fear them in their 
traditions. Insomuch, that the evil people, which fear 
not to resist a good king, and to rise against him, dare 
not lay hands on one of them, neither for defiling of wife, 
daughter, or very mother. When all men lose life and 
lands, they remain always sure and in safety, and ever 
win somewhat. For whosoever conquereth other men's 
lands unrightfully, ever giveth them part with them. To 
them is all thing lawful. In all councils and parliaments 
are they the chief. Without them may no king be 
crowned, neither until he be sworn to their liberties. 
All secrets know they, even the very thoughts of men's 
hearts. By them all things are ministered No king nor 
realm may, through their falsehood, live in peace. To 
believe they teach not in Christ, but in them and their 
disguised hypocrisy. And of them compel they all men 
to buy redemption and forgiveness of sins. The people's 
sin they eat, and thereof wax fat. The more wicked the 
people are, the more prosperous is their commonwealth. 

As ibe 
Jews are 
the chil- 
dren of 
Abraham, 
so are tbc 
bj3ho|iB the 
of the 
spoatlcB. 

The itpiri- 
timltv 
hiive 
taiTght to 
feur tlidr 

They win 
point! whftt 
alwiiya. 


282
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

'tliey tbll 
seek ho- 
Dour hari* 
ncilhf r can 
iliey do 
God'd 
lJ14:4Hllge. 

Br learned. 

God'i word 
otigUt nil 
men to 
know. 

Thty do rU 

GodV word 
oughl ki 
judge. 

If kings and great men do amiss, they must build abbeys 
and colleges; mean men build chantreys, poor find 
trentals and brotherhoods and begging friars. Their own 
heirs do men disinherit to endote them. All kings are 
compelled to submit themselves to them. Read the story 
of king John, and of other kings. They will have their 
causes avenged, though whole realms should therefore 
perish. Take from them their disguising, so are they not 
spiritual. Compare that they have taught us unto the 
Scripture, so are we without faith. 

Christ saith, (John, vth chapter,) How can ye believe 
which receive glory one of another? If they that seek to 
be glorious can have no faith, then are our prelates faith- 
less, verily. And (John viith.) he saith, He that speaketh 
of himself, seeketh his own glory. If to seek glory and 
honour be a sure token that a man speaketh of his own- 
self, and doth his own message, and not his master's; 
then is the doctrine of our prelates of themselves, and not 
of God. Be learned, therefore, ye that judge the earth, 
lest God be angry with you, and ye perish from the right 
way. 

Be learned, lest the hypocrites bring the wrath of God 
upon your heads, and compel you to shed innocent blood; 
as they have compelled your predecessors to slay the 
prophets, to kill Christ and his apostles, and all the 
righteous that since were slain. God's word pertaineth 
unto all men; as it pertaineth unto all servants to know 
their master's will and pleasure; and to all subjects to 
know the laws of their prince. Let not the hypocrites do 
all things secretly. What reason is it that mine enemy 
should put me in prison at his pleasure, and their diet 
me, and handle me as he lusteth; and judge me him- 
self, and that secretly; and condemn me by a law of his 
own making, and then deliver me to Pilate to murder me? 
Let God's word try every man's doctrine, and whomsoever 
God's word proveth unclean, let him be taken for a leper. 
One Scripture will help to declare another. And the cir- 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
283

cumstances, that is to say, the places that go before and 
after, will give light unto the middle text. And the open 
and manifest Scriptures will ever improve the false and 
wrong exposition of the darker sentences. Let the tem- 
poral power, to whom God hath given the sword, to take 
vengeance, look or ever that they leap, and see what they 
do. Let the causes be disputed before them, and let him 
that is accused have room to answer for himself. The 
powers to whom God hath committed the sword shall give 
account for every drop of blood that is shed on the 
earth. Then shall their ignorance not excuse them, nor 
the saying of the hypocrites help them, — My soul for 
your's, your grace shall do a meritorious deed; your 
grace ought not to hear them, it is an old heresy 
condemned by the church. The king ought to look in 
the Scripture, and see whether it were truly condemned 
or no, if he will punish it. If the king, or his officer for 
him, will slay me, so ought the king, or his officer, to 
judge me. The king cannot, but unto his damnation, 
lend his sword to kill whom he judgeth not by his own 
laws. Let him that is accused stand on the one side, and 
the accuser on the other side; and let the king's judge sit 
and judge the cause, if the king will kill, and not be a 
murderer before God. 

Hereof may ye see, not only that our persecution is for 
the same cause that Christ's was, and that we say nothing 
that Christ said not; but also that all persecution is only 
for rebuking of hypocrisy; that is to say, of man's righte- 
ousness, and of holy deeds which man hath imagined to 
please God, and to be saved by, without God's word, and 
beside the Testament that God hath made in Christ. 
If Christ had not rebuked the Pharisees because they 
taught the people to believe in their traditions and holi- 
ness, and in offerings that came to their advantage, and 
that they taught the widows, and them that had their 
friends dead, to believe in their prayers; and that through 
their prayers the dead should be saved; and through that 

The right 
wny to 
the Scrip- 
ture, 

Th« kmgs 
hhVV! A 
*ltjtig^c be- 
fore wUuin 
my soul 
for youn 
helpetU 

Preach 
whnt thou 
nrlU, liul 
rchuke uol 
bypocrifly. 


284
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Tlic pre- 
Intvs nrc 
clothed iu 
red. 

Fdleaxes. 

means, robbed them both of their goods, and also of 
the Testament and promises that God had made, to all 
that repented in Christ to come, he might have been un- 
crucified unto this day. 

If St. Paul also had not preached against circumcision, 
that it justified not; and that vows, offerings, and cere- 
monies justified not; and that righteousness, and for- 
giveness of sins, came not by any deserving of our deeds, 
but by faith, or believing the promises of God, and by the 
deserving and merits of Christ only, he might have lived 
unto this hour. Likewise, if we preached not against 
pride, covetousness, lechery, extortion, usury, simony, 
and against the evil living both of the spiritualty, as well 
as of the temporalty, and against inclosings of parks, 
raising of rents and fines, and of the carrying out of wool 
out of the realm, we might endure long enough. But 
touch the scab of hypocrisy, or pope-holiness, and go 
about to utter their false doctrine wherewith they reign as 
gods in the heart and consciences of men, and rob them 
not of lands, goods, and authority only, but also of the 
Testament of God, and salvation that is in Christ; then 
helpeth thee neither God's word, nor yet if thou didst 
miracles; but that thou art not an heretic only, and hast 
the devil within thee, but also a breaker of the king's 
peace, and a traitor. But let us return unto our lying 
signs again. 

What signifieth that the prelates are so bloody, and 
clothed in red? that they be ready every hour to suffer 
martyrdom for the testimony of God's word. Is that also 
a false sign? When no man dare for them once open 
his mouth to ask a question of God's word, because they 
are ready to burn him. 

What signifieth the poleaxes that are borne before 
high legates, a latere? Whatsoever false sign they make of 
them I care not; but of this I am sure, that as the old 
hypocrites when they had slain Christ, set pole-axes to 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
285

keep him in his sepulchre, that he should not rise again, 
even so have our hypocrites buried the Testament that 
God made unto us in Christ's blood, and to keep it 
down, that it rise not again, is all their study; whereof 
these poleaxes are the very sign. 

Is not that shepherd's hook, the bishop's cross, a false 
sign? Is not that white rochet that the bishops and 
canons wear, so like a nun, and so effeminately, a false 
sign? What other things are their sandals, gloves, mitres, 
and all the whole pomp of their disguising, than false signs 
in which Paul prophesied that they should come? And 
as Christ warned us to beware of wolves in lamb's skins,
and bade us look rather unto their fruits and deeds, than
to wonder at their disguisings. Run throughout all our
holy religions, and thou shalt find them likewise all 
clothed in falsehood. 


OF THE SACRAMENTS. 

FORASMUCH as we be come to signs, we will speak 
a word or two of the signs which God hath ordained, 
that is to say, of the Sacraments which Christ left among 
us for our comfort, that we may walk in light and in truth 
and in feeling of the power of God. For he that walketh 
in the day stumbleth not; when contrariwise he that 
walketh in the night stumbleth. (John xi.) And they that 
walk in darkness wot not whither they go. (John xii.) 

This word sacrament is as much to say as an holy sign, 
and representeth alway some promise of God. As in the 
Old Testament God ordained that the rainbow should re- 
present and signify unto all men an oath that God sware 
to Noah, and to all men after him, that he would no more 
drown the world through water. 

Sacraments 
are signs of 
God's pro« 
niises. 


286
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

THE SACRAMENT OF THE BODY AND BLOOD 
OF CHRIST. 

tBni #'iliCil 
the Mcra- 
meot teftcb* 
ctb» justi- 

SO the Sacrament of the body aod blood of Christ, hath 
a promise annexed, which the priest should declare in 
the English tongue. This is my body that is broken for 
you. This is my blood that is shed for many unto the 
forgiveness of sins. This do in remembrance of me, saith 
Christ. (Luke xxii. and 1 Cor. ii.) If when thou seest 
the Sacrament, or eatest his body, or drinkest his blood, 
thou have this promise fast in thine heart (that his body 
was slain, and his blood shed for thy sins) and believest it, 
so art thou saved and justified thereby. If not, so helpeth 
it thee not, though thou hearest a thousand masses in a 
day, or though thou doest nothing else all thy life long than 
eat his body, or drink his blood: no more than it should 
help thee in a dead thirst, to behold a bush at a tavern 
door, if thou knewest not thereby that there were wine 
within to be sold. 


BAPTISM. 

BAPTISM hath also his word and promise, which the 
priest ought to teach the people, and christen them in 
the English tongue, and not to play the popinjay with 
Credo say ye, Volo say ye, and Baptismum say ye, 
for there ought to be no mumming in such a matter. The 
priest before he baptiseth, asketh, saying: Believest thou 
in God the Father Almighty, and in his Son Jesus Christ, 
and in the Holy Ghost, and that the congregation of 
Christ is holy? And they say, Yea, Then the priest 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
287

upon this faith baptizeth the child in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, for the 
forgiveness, of sins, as Peter saith, (Acts ii.) 

The washing without the word helpeth not: but through 
the word it purifieth and cleanseth us. Aa thou readest 
(Eph. v.) How Christ cleanseth the congregation in the 
fountain of water through the word. The word is the 
promise that God hath made. Now as a preacher in 
preaching the word of God saveth the hearers that believe, 
so doth the washing, in that it preacheth and representeth 
unto us the promise that God hath made unto us in Christ. 
The washing preacheth unto us, that we are cleansed 
with Christ's bloodshedding, which was an offering and a 
satisfaction for thy sin of all that repent and believe, con- 
enting and submitting themselves unto the will of God. 
The plunging into the water signifieth that we die, and 
are buried with Christ, as concerning the old life of sin 
which is in Adam. And the pulling out again, signifieth 
that we rise again with Christ in a new life, full of the 
Holy Ghost, which shall teach us and guide us, and work 
the will of God in us, as thou seest Rom. vi. 

Mow the 
Sacrnmenti 


OF WEDLOCK. 

MATRIMONY or wedlock is a state or a degree or- 
dained of God, and an office wherein the husband 
serveth the wife, and the wife the husband. It was or- 
dained for a remedy, and to encrease the world, and for 
the man to help the woman, and the woman the man with 
all love and kindness; and not to signify any promise that 
ever I heard or read of in the Scripture. Therefore 
ought it not to be called a Sacrament. It hath a promise 
that we sin not in that state, if a man receive his wife as 

waa not or- 
dfiLDi^d ta 
signify imjr 


288
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

he holjr, 
why had 
ihey Itvtt 
liKve 
whore* 

a gift given to him of God, and the wife her husband 
likewise; as all manner [of] meats and drinks have a pro- 
mise that we sin not, if we use them measurably with 
thanksgiving. If they call matrimony a sacrament because 
the Scripture useth the similitude of matrimony to express 
the marriage, or wedlock, that is between us and Christ; 
(for as a woman though she be never so poor, yet when 
she is married, is as rich as her husband: even so we when 
we repent and believe the promises of God in Christ, 
though we be never so poor sinners, yet are as rich as 
Christ; all his merits are ours with all that he hath;) if 
for that cause they call it a sacrament, so will I mustard 
seed, leaven, a net, keys, bread, water, and a thousand 
other things which Christ and the prophets, and all the 
Scripture use, to express the kingdom of heaven and God's 
word withal. They praise wedlock with their mouth, and 
say it is an holy thing, as it is verily, but had lever be sanc- 
tified with an whore, than to come within the sanctuary. 


OF ORDER. 

SUBDEACON, Deacon, Priest, Bishop, Cardinal, 
Patriarch and Pope, be names of offices and service, or 
should be, and not Sacraments. There is no promise 
coupled therewith. If they minister their offices truly, it 
is a sign that Christ's Spirit is in them, if not, that the 
devil is in them. Are these all Sacraments, or which one 
of them? Or what thing in them is that holy sign or Sa- 
crament? The shaving, or the anointing? What also is 
the promise that is signified thereby? But what word 
printeth in them that character, that spiritual seal? O 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
289

dreamers and natural beasts without the seal of the Spirit 
of God; but sealed with the mark of the beast and with 
cankered consciences. 

There is a word called in Latin Sacerdos, in Greek 
Hiereus, in Hebrew Cohan, that is, a minister, an officer, 
a sacrificer or a priest; as Aaron was a priest and sacrificed 
for the people, and was a mediator between God and them. 
And in the English should it have had some other name 
than priest? But antichrist hath deceived us with un- 
known and strange terms, to bring us into confusion and 
superstitious blindness. Of that manner is Christ a 
priest for ever, and all we priests through him, and need no 
more of any such priest on earth to be a mean for us 
unto God. For Christ hath brought us all into the inner 
temple, within the veil or forehanging, and unto the mercy- 
stool of God. And hath coupled us unto God, where 
we offer every man for himself the desires and petitions of 
his heart, and sacrifice and kill the lusts and appetites of 
his flesh, with prayer, fasting, and all manner [of] godly 
living. 

Another word is there in Greek, called presbiter, in 
Latin senior, in English an elder, and is nothing but an 
officer to teach, and not to be a mediator between God 
and us. This needeth no anointing of man. They of 
the Old Testament were anointed with oil, to signify the 
anointing of Christ, and of us through Christ with the 
Holy Ghost. Thiswise is no man priest but he that is 
chosen, save as in time of necessity every person christen- 
eth, so may every man teach his wife and household, and 
the wife her children. So in time of need if I see my 
brother sin, I may between him and me rebuke him, and 
damn his deed by the law of God. And may also com- 
fort them that are in despair with the promises of God, 
and save them if they believe. 

By a priest then in the New Testament, understand no- 
thing but an elder to teach the younger, and to bring 
them unto the full knowledge and understanding of Christ; 

VOL. II. u 

Sacerdos. 

Presbitcr. 

Priests noir 
ought not 
to be 
anointed 
i\itli oil. 

The office 
of a priest. 


290
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

They will 
be Liolipr, 
but tlieir 
deeds be 
not Ijoiy nl 
Jill, 

Com pure 
their itc^efU 
to ihfi ddc* 
trine nod 
deedfl of 
Christ and 
of Ills upos- 
tlii«^ luid 
judge their 
fruiU. 

and to minister the Sacraments which Christ ordained, 
which is also nothing but to preach Christ's promises. 
And by them that give all their study to quench the light 
of truth, and to hold the people in darkness, understand 
the disciples af Satan and messengers of antichrist, what- 
soever names they have, or whatsoever they call themselves. 
And as concerning that our spiritualty (as they will be
called) make themselves holier than the lay people, and 
take so great lands and goods to pray for them, and pro-
mise them pardons and forgiveness of sins, or absolution; 
without preaching of Christ's promises, is falsehood, and 
the working of antichrist: and (as I have said) the raven-
ing of those wolves which Paul (Acts xx.) prophesied 
should come after his departing not sparing the flock. 
Their doctrine is that merchandise whereof Peter speaketh,
saying: Through covetousness shall they with feigned words 
make merchandise of you. (2 Pet. ii.) And their reasons,
wherewith they prove their doctrine, are, (as saith Paul 
1 Tim. vi.) Superfluous disputings, arguings or brawlings of 
men with corrupt minds, and destitute of truth, which 
think that lucre is godliness. But Christ saith (Matt. vii.) 
By their fruits shalt thou know them; that is, by their 
filthy covetousness, and shameless ambition, and drunken 
desire of honour, contrary unto the ensample and doctrine 
of Christ and of his apostles. Christ said to Peter, (the 
last chapter of John :) Feed my sheep: and not shear thy 
flock. And Peter saith, (1 Pet. v.) Not being lords over 
the parishes: but these shear, and are become lords. Paul 
saith (2 Cor. ii.) Not that we be lords over your faith: 
but these will be lords, and compel us to believe whatso- 
ever they lust, without any witness of Scripture, yea, clean 
contrary to the Scripture: when the open text rebuketh it, 
Paul saith, It is better to give, than to receive, (Acts. xx.) 
But these do nothing in the world but lay snares to catch 
and receive whatsoever cometh, as it were the gaping 
mouth of hell. And (2 Cor. xii.) I seek not yours, but you: 
but these seek not you to Christ, but your's to themselves, 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
291

and therefore lest their deeds should be rebuked will not 
come at the light. 

Nevertheless the truth is, that we are all equally be- 
loved in Christ, and God hath sworn to all indifferently. 
According, therefore, as every man believeth God's pro- 
mises, longeth for them, and is diligent to pray unto God 
to fulfil them, so is his prayer heard, and as good is the 
prayer of a cobbler, as of a cardinal; and of a butcher, 
as of a bishop; and the blessing of a baker that knoweth 
the truth, is as good as the blessing of our most holy 
father the pope. And by blessing, understand not the
wagging of the pope's or bishop's hand over thine head;
but prayer, as when we say, God make thee a good man,
Christ put his Spirit in thee, or give thee grace and power 
to walk in the truth, and to follow his commandments, 
&c. As Rebecca's friends blessed her when she departed, 
(Gen. xxiv.) saying, Thou art our sister: grow unto 
thousand thousands, and thy seed possess the gates of their 
enemies. And as Isaac blessed Jacob, (Gen. xxvii.) say- 
ing, God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness 
of the earth, abundance of corn, wine and oil, &c. And 
(Gen. xxviii.) Almighty God bless thee, and make thee 
grow, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a great 
multitude of people, and give to thee and to thy seed 
after thee, the blessings of Abraham, that thou mayest 
possess the land wherein thou art a stranger, which he 
promised to thy grandfather, and such like. 

Last of all, one singular doubt they have; what maketh 
the priest; the anointing or putting on of the hands, or 
what other ceremony, or what words? About which they 
brawl and scold, one ready to tear out another's throat. 
One saith this, and another that, but they cannot agree. 
Neither can any of them make so strong a reason which 
another cannot improve. For they are all out of the way, 
and without the Spirit of God to judge spiritual things. 
Howbeit to this I answer, that when Christ called twelve up 
into the mountain, and chose them, then immediately with- 

u 2 


292
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

The rnm- 
iimrMlrcK^Qt 
priests 

of huidi. 

out any anointing or ceremony were they his apostles; 
that is to wit, ministers chosen to be sent to preach his 
Testament unto all the whole world. And after the re- 
surrection, when he had opened their wits, and given 
them knowledge to understand the secrets of his Testament, 
and how to bind and loose, and what he would have them 
to do in all things, then he sent them forth with a com- 
mandment to preach, and bind the unbelieving that con- 
tinue in sin, and to loose the believing that repent. And 
that commandment or charge made them bishops, priests, 
popes, and all thing. If they say that Christ made them 
priests at his maundy, or last supper, when he said, Do 
this in the remembrance of me: I answer, Though the apos- 
tles wist not then what he meant, yet I will not strive nor 
say thereagainst. Neverthelater the commandment and the 
charge which he gave them made them priests. 

And (Acts the first,) when Matthias was chosen by lot, 
it is not to be doubted but that the apostles, after their 
common manner, prayed for him that God would give him 
grace to minister his office truly; and put their hands on 
him, and exhorted him, and gave him charge to be dili- 
gent and faithful, and then was he as great as the best. 
And (Acts vi.) when the disciples that believed had chosen 
six deacons to minister to the widows, the apostles prayed 
and put their hands on them, and admitted them without 
more ado. Their putting on of hands was not after the 
manner of the dumb blessing of our holy bishops, with 
two fingers; but they spake unto them, and told them their 
duty, and gave them a charge, and warned them to be 
faithful in the Lord's business: as we choose temporal 
officers, and read their duty to them, and they promise to 
be faithful ministers, and then are admitted. Neither is 
there any other manner or ceremony at all required in 
making of our spiritual officers, than to choose an able 
person, and then to rehearse him his duty, and give him 
his charge, and so to put him in his room. And as for 
that other solemn doubt, as they call it, Whether Judas 


TYNDALE.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 293

was a priest or no? I care not what he then was; but of
this I am sure, that he is now not only priest, but also
bishop, cardinal, and pope. 


PENANCE. 

PENANCE is a word of their own forging, to deceive 
us withal, as many others are. In the Scripture 
we find, Penitentia, repentance. Agite penitentiam, do 
repent; Peniteat vos, let it repent you. Metanoyte, in 
Greek, forthink ye, or let it forthink you. Of re-
pentance they have made penance, to blind the people,
and to make them think that they must take pains, 
and do some holy deeds to make satisfaction for their 
sins; namely, such as they enjoin them. As thou mayest 
see in the chronicles, when great kings and tyrants 
(which with violence of sword conquered other kings' 
lands, and slew all that came to hand) came to them- 
selves, and had conscience of their wicked deeds, then the 
bishops coupled them not to Christ; but unto the pope, 
and preached the pope unto them, and made them to 
submit themselves, and also their realms, unto the holy 
father the pope, and to take penance, as they call it; 
that is to say, such injunctions as the pope and bishops 
would command them to do, to build abbeys, to endote 
them with livelihood, to be prayed for for ever: and to 
give them exemptions, and privilege, and license, to do 
what they lust, unpunished. 

Repentance goeth before faith, and prepareth the way
to Christ, and to the promises. For Christ cometh no
but unto them that see their sins in the law, and repent. 
Repentance, that is to say, this mourning and sorrow of 
the heart, lasteth all our lives long. For we find ourselves 
all our lives long too weak for God's law, and therefore 
sorrow and mourn, longing for strength. Repentance is 


294
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

UQCt U 
signified 
by bap- 

no sacrament: as faith, hope, love, and knowledge of a 
man's sins are not to be called sacraments. For they are 
spiritual and invisible. Now must a sacrament be an out- 
ward sign that may be seen, to signify, to represent, and 
to put a man in remembrance of some spiritual promise, 
which cannot be seen but by faith only. Repentance, 
and all the good deeds which accompany repentance, to 
slay the lusts of the flesh, are signified by baptism. For 
Paul saith, (Rom vi.) (as it is above rehearsed) Remember 
ye not (saith he) that all we which are baptized in the 
name of Christ Jesus, are baptized to die with him? We 
are buried with him in baptism for to die; that is, to kill
the lusts and the rebellion which remaineth in the flesh.
And after that he saith, Ye are dead, as concerning sin, 
but live unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. If 
thou look on the profession of our hearts, and on the 
spirit and forgiveness which we have received through 
Christ's merits, we are full dead; but if thou look on the 
rebellion of the flesh, we do but begin to die, and to be 
baptized; that is, to drown and quench the lusts, and are 
full baptized at the last minute of death. And as con- 
cerning the working of the Spirit, we begin to live, and 
grow every day more and more both in knowledge, and 
also in godly living, according as the lusts abate. As a 
child receiveth the full soul at the first day, yet groweth 
daily in the operations and works thereof. 


OF CONFESSION. 

CONFESSION is divers: one followeth true faith in- 
separably, and is the confessing and knowledging 
with the mouth, wherein we put our trust and confi- 
dence. As when we say our Credo, confessing that we 
trust in God the Father Almighty, and in his truth and 
promises; and in his son Jesus, our Lord, and in his 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTlAN MAN.
295

merits and deservings; and in the Holy Ghost, and in his 
power, assistance and guiding. This confession is neces- 
sary unto all men that will be saved. For Christ saith, 
(Matt. x.) He that denieth me before men, him will I 
deny before my Father that is in heaven. And of this 
confession, saith the holy apostle Paul, in the xth chapter, 
The belief of the heart justifieth; and to knowledge with 
the mouth maketh a man safe. This is a wonderful text 
for our philosophers, or rather sophisters, our worldly 
wise enemies to the wisdom of God, our deep and pro- 
found wells without water, our clouds without moisture of 
rain; that is to say, natural souls without the Spirit of 
God, and feeling of godly things. To justify and to 
make safe are both one thing. And to confess with the 
mouth is a good work, and the fruit of a true faith, as all 
other works are. 

If thou repent and believe the promises, then God's 
truth justifieth thee; that is, forgiveth thee thy sins, and 
sealeth thee with his Holy Spirit, and maketh thee heir of 
everlasting life, through Christ's deservings. Now if thou 
have true faith, so seest thou the exceeding and infinite 
love and mercy which God hath showed thee freely in 
Christ: then must thou needs love again: and love 
cannot but compel thee to work, and boldly to confess and 
knowledge thy Lord Christ, and the trust which thou 
hast in his word. And this knowledge maketh thee safe; 
that is, declareth that thou art safe already, certifieth thine 
heart, and maketh thee feel that thy faith is right, and 
that God's Spirit is in thee, as all other good works do. 
For if when it cometh unto the point, thou hast no lust 
to work, nor power to confess, how couldest thou pre- 
sume to think that God's Spirit were in thee? 

Another confession is there which goeth before faith, 
and accompanieth repentance. For whosoever repenteth, 
doth knowledge his sins in his heart. And whosoever 
doth knowledge his sins, receiveth forgiveness (as saith 
John, in the first of his first Epistle.) If we knowledge 

One cim- 
feaBlon Is 
to kTiQW- 
wljefciii 
thoM put ' 
teit thy 
truir. 

t} miitfl op- 
pone thee, 
Itiau linrc 
power to 
tlicp jvrt 
thou sure 
thnt tbou 
art safe* 

Another 
confession 
k to know- 
ledgre thy 
sins ill tlitn^ 
hciirt unio 


296 THE OBEDIENCE OF [TYNDALE.

Shrift was 
put down 
for knavery 
amottg the 
Greek* ; 
btit II at3- 
thereby 

our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; that is, because 
he hath promised, he must for his truth's sake do it. This 
confession is necessary all our lives long, as in repentance. 
And as thou understandest of repentance, so understand 
of this confession, for it is likewise included in the sacra- 
ment of baptism. For we always repent, and always 
knowledge or confess our sins unto God, and yet despair 
not; but remember that we are washed in Christ's blood;
which thing our baptism doth represent and signify 
unto us. 

Shrift in the ear is verily a work of Satan, and that the
falsest that ever was wrought, and that most hath de-
voured the faith. It began among the Greeks, and was
not as it if now, to reckon all a man's sins in the priest's
ear; but to ask counsel of such doubts as men had, as thou 
mayest see in St. Jerome, and in other authors. Neither 
went they to priests only, which were very few at that 
time, no more than preached the word of God, for this 
so great vantage in so many masses saying was not yet 
found; but went indifferently, where they saw a good and 
a learned man. And for because of a little knavery 
which a deacon at Constantinople played through con- 
fession with one of the chief wives of the city, it was laid 
down again. But we, antichrist's possession, the more 
knavery we see grow thereby daily, the more we stablish 
it. A Christian man is a spiritual thing, and hath God's 
word in his heart, and God's Spirit to certify him of all 
things. He is not bound to come to any ear. And as for 
the reasons which they make, are but persuasions of man's 
wisdom. First, as pertaining unto the keys and manner 
of binding and loosing, is enough above rehearsed, and in 
other places. Thou mayest also see how the apostles used 
them in the Acts, and in Paul's Epistles how at the
preaching of faith the Spirit came, and certified their
hearts that they were justified through believing the pro- 
mises. 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
297

When a man feeleth that his heart consenteth unto the 
law of God, and feeleth himself meek, patient, courteous, 
and merciful to his neighbour, altered and fashioned like 
unto Christ, why should he doubt but that God hath forgiven 
him, and chosen him, and put his Spirit in him, though 
he never cram his sin into the priest's ear? 

One blind reason have they, saying, How shall the 
priest unbind, loose, and forgive the sin which he knoweth 
not? How did the apostles? The Scripture forsake 
they, and run unto their blind reasons, and draw the 
Scripture unto a carnal purpose. When I have told thee 
in thine ear all that I have done my life long, in order and 
with all circumstances after the shamefullest manner, what 
canst thou do more than preach me the promises, saying, 
If thou repent and believe, God's truth shall save thee 
for Christ's sake? Thou seest not mine heart, thou 
knowest not whether I repent or no, neither whether I 
consent to the law, that it is holy, righteous, and good. 
Moreover, whether I believe the promises or no, is also 
unknown to thee. If thou preach the law and the pro- 
mises (as the apostles did) so should they that God hath 
chosen, repent, and believe and be saved: even now as 
well as then. Howbeit antichrist must know all secrets 
to stablish his kingdom, and to work his mysteries withal. 

They bring also for them the stories of the ten lepers, 
which is written in the xviith chapter of Luke. Here 
mark their falsehood, and learn to know them for ever. 
The fourteenth Sunday after the feast of the Trinity, the 
beginning of the seventh lesson, is the said gospel, and 
the eighth and the ninth lessons, with the rest of the 
seventh, is the exposition of Bede upon the said gospel. 
Where, saith Bede, of all that Christ healed, of what- 
soever disease it were, he sent none unto the priests, but 
the lepers. And by the lepers interpreteth followers of 
false doctrine only, which the spiritual officers, and the 
learned men of the congregation ought to examine, and 
rebuke their learning with God's word, and to warn the

How a 
know ihat 
liU sins Arc 
ft^rglven. 

RHnd ncn- 
toii to llielr 
not God'« 
Sjiirit, 

Lcftrn to 
they lire 
verily 
Ippers III 
their 


298
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

congregation to beware of them. Which, if they were 
afterward healed by the grace of Christ, ought to come 
before the congregation, and there openly confess their 
true faith. 

But all other vices (saith he) doth God heal within in 
the conscience. 

Though they thiswise read at matins, yet at high mass, if 
they have any sermon at all, they lie clean contrary unto this 
open truth. Neither are they ashamed at all. For why? 
they walk altogether in darkness. 


OF CONTRITION. 

AtlrUioQ 19 
of the lea- 
ven of the 
PHAriKes. 

CONTRITION and repentance are both one, and no- 
thing else but a sorrowful and a mourning heart. And 
because that God hath promised mercy unto a contrite heart, 
that is, to a sorrowful and repenting heart, they, to beguile 
God's word and to stablish their wicked tradition, have 
feigned that new word attrition, sayings Thou canst not 
know whether thy sorrow or repentance be contrition or at- 
trition, except thou be shriven. When thou art shriven then 
it is true contrition. Oh! sorry Pharisee, that is thy leaven, 
of which Christ so diligently bade us beware, (Matt. vi.) 
And the very prophesy of Peter, Through covetousness 
with feigned words shall they make merchandise of you. 
(2 Peter ii.) With such glosses corrupt they God's word, to 
sit in the consciences of the people, to lead them captive, 
and to make a prey of them: buying and selling their sins 
to satisfy their unsatiable covetousness. Nevertheless the 
truth is, when any man hath trespassed against God, if he 
repent and knowledge his trespass, God promiseth him for- 
giveness without ear shrift. 

If he that hath offended his neighbour repent and 
knowledge his fault, asking forgiveness, if his neighbour 
forgive him, God forgiveth him also by his holy promise. 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
299

(Matt. xviii.) Likewise, if he that sinneth openly when he is 
openly rebuked, repent and turn, then if the congregation 
forgive him, God forgiveth him; and so forth whosoever 
repenteth, and when he is rebuked knowledgeth his fault, is 
forgiven.

He also that doubteth, or hath his conscience tangled, 
ought to open his mind unto some faithful brother that is 
learned, and he shall give him faithful counsel to help him 
withal.

To whom a man trespaaseth, unto him he ought to con-
fess. But to confess myself unto thee O antichrist, whom I 
have not offended, am I not bound. 

They of the old law had no confession in the ear. Nei- 
ther the apostles, nor they that followed many hundred years 
after, knew of any such whispering. Whereby then was their 
attrition turned unto contrition? yea, why are we, which 
Christ came to loose, more bound than the Jews? Yea, 
and why are we more bound without Scripture? for Christ 
came not to make us more bound, but to loose us and to 
make a thousand things no sin which before were sin, and 
are now become sin again. He left none other law with us 
but the law of love. He loosed us not from Moses to bind 
us unto antichrist's ear. God had not tied Christ unto 
antichrist's ear, neither hath poured all his mercy in thither, 
for it hath no record in the Old Testament, that antichrist's 
ear should be Propiciatorium, that is to wit, God's mercy- 
stool, and that God should creep into so narrow a hole, so 
that he could no where else be found. Neither did 
God write his laws, neither yet his holy promises in 
antichrist's ear; but hath graved them with his holy Spirit 
in the hearts of them that believe, that they might have 
them always ready at hand to be saved thereby. 

Wkom ft 
mail of* 
rtindflb to 
hltn iniiHt 
lie confcAB. 

1: hatfj no 
record io 
ilir Scrip- 
ture IHai 
God should 
creep m 
nnd bide 
lumself in 
antkbrist'* 
ear. 


300
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

SATISFACTION. 

tian 

AS pertaining unto satisfaction, thiswise understand, 
that he that loveth God hath a commandment, (as 
St. John saith in the fourth chapter of his first Epistle) 
to love his neighbour also: whom if thou have offended, 
thou must make him amends or satisfaction, or at the least- 
way, if thou be not able, ask him forgiveness, and if he will 
have mercy of God, he is bound to forgive thee. If he will 
not, yet God forgiveth thee, if thou thus submit thyself. 
But unto Godward, Christ is a perpetual and an everlasting 
satisfaction for evermore. 

As oft as thou fallest through frailty, repent and come 
again, and thou art safe and welcome, as thou mayest 
see by the similitude of the riotous son, (Luke xv.) 
If thou be lopen out of sanctuary, come in again. If 
thou be fallen from the way of truth, come thereto again, 
and thou art safe: if thou be gone astray, come to the fold 
again, and the Shepherd, Christ, shall save thee, yea, and the 
angels of heaven shall rejoice at thy coming, so far it is off 
that any man shall beat thee or chide thee. If any Pha- 
risee envy thee, grudge at thee, or rail upon thee, thy Father 
shall make answer for thee, as thou seest in the fore-re- 
hearsed likeness or parable. Whosoever therefore is gone 
out of the way, by whatsoever chance it be, let him come 
to his baptism again, and unto the profession thereof, and 
he shall be safe. 

For though that the washing of baptism be past, yet the 
power thereof, that is to say, the word of God, which 
baptism preacheth, lasteth ever and saveth for ever. As 
Paul is past and gone, nevertheless the word that Paul 
preached lasteth ever, and saveth ever as many as come 
thereto with a repenting heart and a steadfast faith. 

Hereby seest thou that when they make penance of re- 

BAptbm 
IftsictU 


TYNDALE.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 301

pentance and call it a sacrament, and divide it into con- 
trition, confession, and satisfaction, they speak of their own 
heads, and lie falsely. 


ABSOLUTION. 

THEIR absolution also justifieth no man from sin. For 
with the heart do men believe to be justified withal, 
saith Paul; (Rom. x.) that is, through faith and believing 
the promises are we justified, as I have sufficiently proved 
in other places with the Scripture. Faith (saith Paul in 
the same place) cometh by hearing, that is to say, by 
hearing the preacher that is sent from God, and preacheth 
God's promises. Now when thou absolvest in Latin, the 
unlearned heareth not. For how, saith Paul, (1 Cor. xiv.) 
When thou blessest in an unknown tongue, shall the un- 
learned say Amen unto thy thanksgiving? for he wotteth not 
what thou sayest. So likewise the lay wotteth not whether 
thou loose or bind, or whether thou bless or curse. In 
like manner is it if the lay understand Latin, or though the 
priest absolve in English. For in his absolution he re- 
hearseth no promise of God: but speaketh his own words, 
saying, I, by the authority of Peter and Paul, absolve or 
loose thee from all thy sins. Thou sayest so, which art 
but a lying man, and never more than now verily. 

Thou sayest, I forgive thee thy sins, and the Scripture, 
(John the first) That Christ only forgiveth and taketh away 
the sins of the world. And Paul and Peter, and all the 
apostles, preach that all is forgiven in Christ and for Christ's 
sake. God's word only looseth, and thou in preaching 
that mightest loose also, and else not. 

Whosoever hath ears let him hear, and let him that hath 
eyes see. If any man love to be blind, his blindness on 
his own head and not on mine. 


302
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Of bmdiog 
aad of the: 
pope's au- 
tUorily or 
povrer^ 

The pope 
c bail i^Dge til 
power, not 
over Dian 
ooly but 
over GckI 
»lso> 

PurgaloTy 
iM tJie 
pope's 
creature : 
lie iiiA>* 
tUerefore 
beb«ld 
Ibere. 
Tbe pope- 
blmletK the 
Atigek. 
Tbelrue 
biudiiif and 
loniflitig. 

St. JerofEie 
biBhopfi aad 
pnctt«. 

They allege for themselves the saying of Christ to 
Peter, (Matt. xvi.) Whatsoever thou bindest on earth, it 
shall be bound; and whatsoever thou looseth and so forth. 
Lo, say they, whatsoever we bind and whatsoever we loose; 
here is nothing excepted. And another text lay they of 
Christ in the last of Matthew; All power is given to me, 
saith Christ, in heaven and in earth: go therefore and 
preach, &c. Preaching leaveth the pope out, and saith 
Lo, all power is given me in heaven and in earth. And 
thereupon taketh upon him temporal power above king and 
emperor, and maketh laws and bindeth them. And like 
power taketh he over God's laws, and dispenseth with them 
at his lust, making no sin of that which God maketh sin, 
and maketh sin where God maketh none: yea, and wipeth 
out God's laws clean, and maketh at his pleasure, and 
with him is lawful what he lusteth. He bindeth where 
God looseth, and looseth where God bindeth. He bles- 
seth where God curseth, and curseth where God blesseth. 
He taketh authority also to bind and loose in purga- 
tory. That permit I unto him, for it is a creature of his 
own making. He also bindeth the angels. For we read 
of popes that have commanded the angels to set divers 
out of purgatory. Howbeit I am not yet certified whether 
they obeyed or no. 

Understand therefore that to bind and to loose, is to 
preach the law of God and the gospel or promises, as thou 
mayest see in the iiid chapter of the second Epistle to tbe 
Corinthians, where Paul called the preaching of the law the 
ministration of death and damnation, and the preaching 
of the promises, the ministering of the Spirit and of 
righteousness. For when the law is preached, all men are 
found sinners, and therefore damned: and when the gos- 
pel and glad tidings are preached, then are all that repent 
and believe, found righteous in Christ. And so expound 
it all the old doctors. Saint Jerome saith upon this text, 
Whatsoever thou bindest, the bishops and priests, saith he, 
for lack of understanding, take a little presumption of the 


TYNDALE.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 303

Pharisees upon them; and think that they have authority to 
bind innocents and to loose the wicked, which thing our 
pope and bishops do. For they say the curse is to be
feared, be it right or wrong. Though thou have not de-
served, yet if the pope curse thee, thou art in peril of thy 
soul as they lie: yea, and though he be never so wrong- 
fully cursed, he must be fain to buy absolution. But
Saint Jerome saith, As the priest of the old law made the
lepers clean or unclean, so bindeth and unbindeth the 
priest of the new law. 

The priest there made no man a leper, neither cleansed 
any man, but God: and the priest judged only by Moses' 
law who was clean and who was unclean, when they were 
brought unto him. 

So here we have the law of God to judge what is sin and 
what is not, and who is bound and who is not. Moreover 
if any man have sinned, yet if he repent and believe the 
promise, we are sure by God's word that he is loosed 
and forgiven in Christ. Other authority than this- 
wise to preach have the priests not. Christ's apostles 
had no other themselves; as it appeareth throughout all 
the New Testament. Therefore it is manifest that they 
have not. 

Saint Paul saith, (1 Cor. xv.) When we say all things
are under Christ, he is to be excepted that put all under
him. God the Father is not under Christ, but above
Christ, and Christ's head. (1 Cor. vi.)

Christ saith (John xii.) I have not spoken of mine own
head, but my Father which sent me gave a commandment
what I should say and what I should speak. Whatsoever
I speak therefore, even as my Father bade me so I speak.
If Christ had a law what he should do, how happeneth it 
that the pope so runneth, at large lawless? though that all 
power were given unto Christ in heaven and in earth: yet 
had he no power over his Father, nor yet to reign tempo- 
rally over temporal princes, but a commandment to obey 
them. How hath the pope then such temporal authority 


304
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

What ftu- 
Ihority 
Chrfit gnve 
fail apostles* 

Tlie ritjht 

How the 
pope nfj;^- 
etU umlur 
ChrhL 

A pcena cc 
^iiipn is A 
proper 
arcftm» 

The pope is 
mure 
m%bty ftnd 
more mer 
ciful for 
money' thnn 
God h tor 
t be dentil of 
hb odiy 
Soo. 

The mcrili 
of ftUQll. 

over king and emperor? How hath he authority above 
God's laws, and to command the angels, the saints, and 
God himself? 

Christ's authority which he gave to his disciples, was to 
preach the law and to bring sinners to repentance; and 
then to preach unto them the promises which the Father 
had made unto all men for his sake. And the same to 
preach only sent he his apostles. As a king sendeth forth 
his judges, and giveth them his authority, saying, What ye 
do that do I. I give you my full power. Yet meaneth 
he not by that full power, that they should destroy any 
town or city, or oppress any man, or do what they list, or 
should reign over the lords and dukes of his realm and 
over his own self. But giveth them a law with them, and 
authority to bind and loose, as farforth as the law 
stretcheth and maketh mention: that is, to punish the 
evil that do wrong, and to avenge the poor that suf- 
fer wrong. And so far as the law stretcheth, will 
the king defend his judge against all men. And as the 
temporal judges bind and loose temporally, so do the 
priests spiritually, and no other ways. Howbeit by false- 
hood and subtlety the pope reigneth under Christ, as car- 
dinals and bishops do under kings, lawless. 

THE pope (say they,) absolveth or looseth, a paena et 
culpa; that is, from the fault or trespass, and from the 
pain due unto the trespass. God, if a man repent, for- 
giveth the offence only, and not the pain also, say they, 
save turneth the everlasting pain unto a temporal pain. 
And appointeth seven years in purgatory for every deadly 
sin. But the pope for money forgiveth both, and hath 
more power than God, and is more merciful than God. 
This do I, saith the pope, of my full power, and of the 
treasure of the church, —- of deservings of martyrs, con- 
fessors, and merits of Christ. 

First, the merits of the saints did not save themselves, 
but were saved by Christ's merits only. 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
305

Secondarily, God hath promised Christ's merits unto 
all that repent; so that whosoever repenteth, is imme- 
diately heir of all Christ's merits, and beloved of God as 
Christ is. How then came this foul monster to be lord 
over Christ's merits, so that he hath power to sell that 
which God giveth freely? O dreamers! yea, O devils, 
and O venemous scorpions, what poison have ye in your 
tails! O pestilent leaven, that so turneth the sweet bread 
of Christ's doctrine into the bitterness of gall! 

The friars run in the same spirit, and teach, saying, 
Do good deeds, and redeem the pains that abide you in 
purgatory; yea, give us somewhat to do good works for 
you. And thus is sin become the profitablest merchan- 
dise in the world. Oh! the cruel wrath of God upon us, 
because we love not the truth. 

For this is the damnation and judgment of God, to 
send a false prophet unto him that will not hear the truth. 
I know you, saith Christ, (John v.) that ye have not the 
love of God in you. I am come in my Father's name, 
and ye receive me not; if another shall come in his own 
name, him shall ye receive. This doth God avenge him- 
self on the malicious hearts which have no love to his 
truth. 

All the promises of God have they either whipped clean 
out, or thus leavened them with open lies, to stablish 
their confession withal. And to keep us from knowledge 
of the truth they do all thing in Latin. 

They pray in Latin, they christen in Latin, they bless 
in Latin, they give absolution in Latin, only curse they 
in the English tongue. Wherein they take upon them 
greater authority than ever God gave them. For in their 
curses, as they call them, with book, bell, and candle, 
they command God and Christ, and the angels, and all 
saints, to curse them: Curse them God (say they,) Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost; curse them Virgin Mary, &c. O 
ye abominable! who gave you authority to command God 
to curse? God commandeth you to bless, and ye com- 

VOL. II. X 

The me- 
n\fi of 
Christ. 

'flic pope 
selietb that 
which God 
giveth 
freely. 

Friars. 

Si a is the 
best mer- 
chandise 
that is. 

Christ pro- 
phesied of 
antichrist, 
and told 
why he 
should 

The pro- 
mises are 
citber put 
nut or 
learened, 
and why. 

All is in 
Latin. 

The pope 
command- 
eth Ood to 
curse. 


306
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

A custom 
thuK h UKed 
ill the 
mnrches of 
Walts. 

mand him to curse! Bless them that persecute you: 
bless but curse not, saith St. Paul, (Rom. xii.) What 
tyranny will these not use over men, which presume and 
take upon them to be lords over God, and to command 
him? If God shall curse any man, who shall bless and 
make him better? No man can amend himself, except 
God pour his Spirit unto him. Have we not a com- 
mandment to love our neighbour as ourselves? How can 
I love him and curse him also? James saith, It is not 
possible that blessing and cursing should come both out of 
one mouth. Christ commandeth, (Matt. v.) saying, Love 
your enemies. Bless them that curse you. Do good to 
them that hate you. Pray for them that do you wrong 
and persecute you, that ye may be the children of your 
heavenly Father. 

In the marches of Wales it is the manner if any man 
have an ox or a cow stolen, he cometh to the curate, 
and desireth him to curse the stealer. And he com- 
mandeth the parish to give him every man God's curse and 
his. God's curse and mine have he, saith every man in 
the parish. O merciful God! what is blasphemy, if 
this be not blasphemy and shaming of the doctrine of 
Christ? 

Understand, therefore, the power of excommunication 
is this: if any man sin openly, and amendeth not when 
he is warned, then ought he to be rebuked openly before 
all the parish. And the priest ought to prove, by the 
Scripture, that all such have no part with Christ. For 
Christ serveth not but for them that love the law of God, 
and consent that it is good, holy, and righteous: and 
repent, sorrowing and mourning for power and strength 
to fulfil it. And all the parish ought to be warned to 
avoid the company of all such, and to take them as 
heathen people. This is not done that he should perish, 
but to save him, to make him ashamed, and to kill the 
lusts of the flesh, that the Spirit might come unto the 
knowledge of truth. And we ought to pity him, and to 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
307

have compassion on him, and with all diligence to pray 
unto God for him, to give him grace to repent, and to 
come to the right way again; and not to use such tyranny 
over God and man, commanding God to curse. And if 
he repent, we ought with all mercy to receive him in 
again. This mayest thou see Matt. xviii. and 1 Cor. v. 
and 2 Cor. ii. 


CONFIRMATION. 

IF confirmation have a promise, then it justifieth as far 
as the promise extendeth. If it have no promise, then 
is it not of God, as the bishops be not. The apostles and 
ministers of God preach God's word; and God's signs or 
sacraments signify God's word also, and put us in remem- 
brance of the promises which God hath made unto us in 
Christ. Contrariwise, antichrist's bishops preach not, 
and their sacraments speak not, but as the disguised 
bishop's mum; so are their superstitious sacraments 
dumb. After that the bishops had left preaching, then 
feigned they this dumb ceremony of confirmation, to have 
somewhat at the leastway, whereby they might reign over 
their dioceses. They reserved unto themselves also the 
christening of bells, and conjuring or hallowing of 
churches and church-yards, and of altars and super-altars, 
and hallowing of chalices, and so forth; whatsoever is of 
honour or profit. Which confirmation, and the other con- 
jurations, also, they have now committed to their suf- 
fragans; because they themselves have no leisure to 
minister such things, for their lusts and pleasures, and 
abundance of all things; and for the cumbrance that they 
have in the king's matters and business of the realm. One 

X 2 

Ood's sa- 
craments 
preach 
God*8 pro* 

The pope's 
sacraments 
are dumb. 

Christening 
of bells. 

Why suf- 
fragans are 
ordained. 


308
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

The bisliopt 
dlviile nil 
among 
them. 

Ceremonies 
brinfr not 
lb(- Holy 
CJhost 

Pnttiof on 
Af bandit 

Prayer of 
fiucli tbtti 
the mi* 

TYtt pu^ 
ling on of 
fiatidi dotb 
neither 
help aor 
hinder. 

keepeth the privy seal; another the great seal; the third is 
confessor, (that is to say, a privy traitor and a secret Judas,) 
he is president of the prince's council; he is an ambas- 
sador; another sort of the king's secret council. Woe 
is unto the realms where they are of the council. As pro- 
fitable are they, verily, unto the realms with their counsel, 
as the wolves unto the sheep, or the foxes unto the geese. 

They will say that the Holy Ghost is given through 
such ceremonies. If God had so promised, so should it 
be; but Paul saith, (Gal. iii.) that the Spirit is received 
through preaching of the faith. And (Acts x.) while 
Peter preached the faith, the Holy Ghost fell on Cor- 
nelius and on his household. How shall we say then to that 
which they will lay against us, in the eighth chapter of 
the Acts of the Apostles, where Peter and John put their 
hands on the Samaritans, and the Holy Ghost came? I 
say, that by putting, or with putting, or as they put their 
hands on them, the Holy Ghost came. Nevertheless, the 
putting on of the hands did neither help nor hinder. For 
the text saith, They prayed for them that they might receive 
the Holy Ghost. 

God had made the apostles a promise, that he would 
with such miracles confirm their preaching, and move 
other to the faith. (Mark, the last.) The apostles, there- 
fore, believed and prayed God to fulfil his promise; and 
God, for his truth's sake, even so did. So was it the 
prayer of faith that brought the Holy Ghost, as thou 
mayest see also in the last of James. If any man be sick, 
saith James, call the elders of the congregation, and let 
them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name 
of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall heal the sick. 
Where a promise is, there is faith bold to pray, and God 
true to give her her petition. Putting on of the hands is 
an indifferent thing. For the Holy Ghost came by 
preaching of the faith, and miracles were done at the 
prayer of faith, as well without putting on of the hands 
as with, as thou seest in many places. Putting on of the 


TYNDALE.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 309

hands was the manner of that nation, as it was to rend 
their clothes, and to put on sackcloth, and to sprinkle 
themselves with ashes and earth, when they heard of or 
saw any sorrowful thing, as it was Paul's manner to 
stretch out his hand when he preached. And as it 
is our manner to hold up our hands when we pray, and 
as some kiss their thumb nail, and put it to their eyes, 
and as we put our hands on children's heads when we 
bless them, saying, Christ bless thee, my son, and God 
make thee a good man: which gestures neither help nor 
hinder. This mayest thou well see by the xiith of the 
Acts, where the Holy Ghost commanded to separate 
Paul and Barnabas, to go and preach. Then the other 
fasted and prayed, and put their hands on their heads and 
sent them forth. They received not the Holy Ghost 
then by putting on of hands, but the other as they put 
their hands on their heads prayed for them, that God 
would go with them, and strength them, and couraged 
them also, bidding them to be strong in God, and 
warned them to be faithful and diligent in the work of 
God, and so forth. 


ANOILING. 

LAST of all cometh the anoiling, without promise, and 
therefore without the Spirit, and without profit, but al- 
together unfruitful and superstitious. The sacraments, 
which they have imagined are all without promise, and 
therefore help not. For whatsoever is not of faith is sin. 
(Rom. xv.) Now without a promise can there be no
faith. The sacraments which Christ himself ordained,
which have also promises, and would save us if we knew
them, and believed them, them minister they in the Latin
tongue. So are they also become as unfruitful as the


310
THE OBEDIENCE OF
TYNDALE.

Thta Itie 
fTiit tbcpro* 
I) I J if »nvetb 
U trnproiT' 
ed. 

Tfag p«opk 
believe iq 
the work 
without 
the pfx>- 

Volowiti^* 

Tlie wqt\ 
uveth not, 
but tlie 
word i tbjtt 
IS to Mjr^ 
the pro 
mite. 

other. Yea they make us believe that the work itself 
without the promise saveth us, which doctrine they learned 
of Aristotle. And thus are we become an hundred times 
worse than the wicked Jews, which believed that the very 
work of their sacrifice justified them. Against which 
Paul fighteth in every Epistle, proving that nothing helpeth 
save the promises which God hath sworn in Christ. 
Ask the people what they understand by their baptism or 
washing? And thou shalt see, that they believe, how that 
the very plunging into the water saveth them: of the pro- 
mises they know not, nor what is signified thereby. Bap- 
tism is called volowing in many places of England, because 
the priest saith, Volo say ye. The child was well volowed 
(say they) yea, and our vicar is as fair a volower as ever a 
priest within this twenty miles. 

Behold how narrowly the people look on the ceremony. 
If ought be left out, or if the child be not altogether dipt 
in the water, or if, because the child is sick, the priest 
dare not plunge him into the water, but pour water on his 
head, how tremble they! how quake they! how say ye, 
Sir John, say they, is this child christened enough? hath it 
his full Christendom? They believe verily that the child 
is not christened; yea I have known priests, that have 
gone unto the orders again, supposing that they were not 
priests, because that the bishop left one of his ceremonies 
undone. That they call confirmation, the people call bi- 
shoping. They think that if the bishop butter the child 
in the forehead, that it is safe. They think that the work 
maketh safe, and likewise suppose they of anoiling. Now 
is this false doctrine, verily. For James saith in the first 
chapter of his Epistle: Of his good will begat he us with 
the word of life; that is, with the word of promise. In 
which we are made God's sons, and heirs of the goodness 
of God, before any good works. For we cannot work 
God's will till we be his sons, and know his will and 
have his Spirit to teach us. And St. Paul saith in the 
fifth chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians: Christ 


TYNOALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
311

cleansed the congregation in the fountain of water, through 
the word. And Peter saith in the first of his first Epistle: 
Ye are born anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal 
seed, by the word of God, which liveth and lasteth ever. 
Paul in every epistle warneth us, that we put no trust in 
works, and to beware of persuasions or arguments of man's 
wisdom, of superstitiousness, of ceremonies, of pope-ho- 
liness, and of all manner [of] disguising. And exhorteth 
us to cleave fast unto the naked and pure word of God. 
The promise of God is the anchor that saveth us in all 
temptations. If all the world be against us, God's word 
is stronger than the world. If the world kill us that shall 
make us alive again. If it be possible for the world to 
cast us into hell from thence, yet shall God's word bring 
us again. Hereby seest thou that it is not the work, but 
the promise that justifieth us through faith. Now where 
no promise is, there can no faith be, and therefore no jus- 
tifying, though there be never so glorious works. The 
sacrament of Christ's body after thiswise preach they. 
Thou must believe that it is no more bread, but the very 
body of Christ, flesh, blood, and bone; even as he went 
here on earth, save his coat. For that is here yet, I wot 
not in how many places. I pray thee what helpeth all 
this? Here is no promise. The devils know that Christ 
died on a Friday, and the Jews also. What are they holp 
thereby? We have a promise that Christ, and his body, 
and his blood, and all that he did, and suffered, is a sacri- 
fice, a ransom, and a full satisfaction for our sins; that 
God for his sake will think no more on them, if they have 
power to repent and believe. 

Holy workmen think that God rejoiceth in the deed 
self, without any farther respect. They think also that 
God, as a cruel tyrant, rejoiceth, and hath delectation in 
our pain taking without any farther respect. And there- 
fore many of them martyr themselves without cause, after 
the ensample of Baal's priests which (2 Kings xviii.) cut 
themselves to please their god withal, and as the old hea- 

Works, bi* 
they ae^er 

In til iKIng^ 
thpy leave 
auUhe pro- 


312
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

How fjir 
for til tbe 
detd is ac- 
e«|itjtbl« to 
God 

then pagans sacrificed their children in the fire unto their 
gods. The monks of the Charterhouse think that the very 
eating of fish in itself pleaseth God, and refer not the 
eating to the chastening of the body. For when they have 
slain their bodies with cold phlegm of fisheating; yet then 
will they eat no flesh, and slay themselves before their 
days. We also, when we offer our sons or daughters, and 
compel or persuade them to vow and profess chastity, 
think that the very pain, and that rage and burning which 
they suffer in abstaining from a make, pleaseth God; and 
so refer not our chastity to our neighbour's profit. For 
when we see thousands fall to innumerable diseases there- 
by, and to die before their days; yea, though we see them 
break the commandments of God daily, and also of very 
impatiency work abominations against nature, too shame- 
ful to be spoken of: yet will we not let them marry, but 
compel them to continue still with violence. And thus 
teach our divines, as it appeareth by their arguments. He 
that taketh most pain, say they, is greatest; and so forth. 

The people are thoroughly brought in belief that the 
deed in itself without any farther respect saveth them; 
if they be so long at church; or say so many paternosters; 
and read so much in a tongue which they understand not; 
or go so much a pilgrimage; and take so much pain; or 
fast such a superstitious fast; or observe such a supersti- 
tious observance, neither profitable to himself nor to his 
neighbour: but done of a good intent only say they, to 
please God withal. Yea, to kiss the pax they think it a me- 
ritorious deed; when to love their neighbour, and to for- 
give him, (which thing is signified thereby,) they study not 
to do, nor have power to do, nor think that they are 
bound to do it, if they be offended by him. So sore 
have our false prophets brought the people out of their 
wits, and have wrapped them in darkness, and have rocked 
them asleep in blindness and ignorance. Now is all such 
doctrine false doctrine, and all such faith, false faith. For 
the deed pleaseth not, but as far forth as it is applied to 


TYNDALE.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 313

our neighbour's profit, or the taming of our bodies to keep 
the commandment. 

Now must the body be tamed only, and that with the 
remedies that God hath ordained, and not killed. Thou 
must not forswear the natural remedy which God hath or- 
dained; and bring thyself into such case that thou shouldest 
either break God's commandment, or kill thyself, or 
burn night and day without rest, so that thou canst not 
once think a godly thought. Neither is it lawful to forsake 
thy neighbour; and to withdraw thyself from serving him, 
and to get thee into a den, and live idly, profitable to no 
man; but robbing all men, first of faith, and then of goods 
and land, and of all he hath; with making him believe in 
the hypocrisy of thy superstitious prayers, and pope-holy 
deeds. The prayer of faith, and the deeds thereof that
spring of love, are accepted before God. The prayer is
good, according to the proportion of faith; and the deed,
according to the measure of love. Now he that bideth
in the world, as monks call it, hath more faith than the
cloisterer. For he hangeth on God in all things. He
must trust God to send him good speed, good luck,
favour, help, a good master, a good neighbour, a good 
servant, a good wife, a good chapman-merchant, to send 
his merchandise safe to land, and a thousand like. He 
loveth also more, which appeareth in that he doth service al- 
ways unto his neighbour. To pray one for another are we 
equally bound; and to pray is a thing that we may always 
do whatsoever we have in hand; and that to do may no man 
hire another: Christ's blood hath hired us already. Thus 
in the deed delighteth God, as far forth as we do it, either 
to serve our neighbour withal, (as I have said) or to tame 
the flesh that we may fulfil the commandment from the 
bottom of the heart. 

And as for our pain taking, God rejoiceth not therein 
as a tyrant; but pitieth us, and as it were mourneth with 
us, and is alway ready and at hand to help us, if we call, 
as a merciful father and a kind mother. Neverthelater 


314
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

A Chris- 
tian nmri ^ 
Dredeth tvoc 
to go a pil- 
grim Hge tu 
be *avcd 
tUcrcby- 

SHlrition 
w wiihia us. 

tioa» 

he suffereth us to fall into many temptations, and much 
adversity: yea, himself layeth the cross of tribulation on 
our backs, not that he rejoiceth in our sorrow, but to 
drive sin out of the flesh, which can none otherwise be 
cured: as the physician and surgeon do many things which 
are painful to the sick, not that they rejoice in the pains 
of the poor wretches, but to persecute and to drive out 
the diseases which can no otherwise be healed. 

When the people believe, therefore, if they do so 
much work, or suffer so much pain, or go so much a 
pilgrimage, that they are safe, [it] is a false faith. For a 
Christian man is not saved by works, but by faith in the 
promises before all good works; though that the works 
(when we work God's commandment with a good will, 
and not works of our own imagination) declare that we 
are safe, and that the Spirit of Him that hath made us 
safe is in us: yea, and as God throngh preaching of faith 
doth purge and justify the heart, even so through working 
of deeds, doth he purge and justify the members, making 
us perfect both in body and soul, after the likeness of 
Christ. 

Neither needeth a Christian man to come hither or 
thither, to Rome, to Jerusalem, or St. James; or any 
other pilgrimage far or near, to be saved thereby, or to 
purchase forgiveness of his sins. For a Christian man's 
health and salvation is within him: even in his mouth. 
(Rom. x.) The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, 
and in thine heart; that is, the word of faith which we 
preach, saith Paul. If we believe the promises with our 
hearts, and confess them with our mouths, we are safe. 
This is our health within us. But how shall they believe 
that they hear not? And how shall they hear without a 
preacher? saith Paul. (Rom. x.) For look on the pro- 
mises of God, and so are all our preachers dumb. Or 
if they preach them, they so sauce them and leaven them, 
that no stomach can brook them, nor find any savour in 
them. For they paint us such an ear confession, as is 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
315

impossible to be kept, and more impossible that it should 
stand with the promises and testament of God. And 
they join them penance, as they call it, to fast, to go 
pilgrimages, and give so much to make satisfaction withal. 
They preach their masses, their merits, their pardons, 
their ceremonies, and put the promise clean out of pos- 
session. The word of health and salvation is nigh thee, 
in thy mouth and thine heart, saith Paul. Nay, say they, 
thy salvation is in our faithful care. This is their 
hold, thereby know they all secrets, thereby mock 
they all men, and all mens' wives; and beguile knight 
and squire, lord and king, and betray all realms. The 
bishops with the pope have a certain conspiration and 
secret treason against the whole world. And by con- 
fession, know they what kings and emperors think. If 
ought be against them, do they never so evil, then move 
they their captives to war and to fight, and give them 
pardons to slay whom they will have taken out of the way. 
They have with falsehood taken from all kings and emperors 
their right and duties, which now they call their freedoms, 
liberties, and privileges, and have perverted the ordinances 
that God left in the world, and have made every king swear 
to defend their falsehood against their ownselves. So that 
now, if any man preach God's word truly, and show 
the freedom and liberty of the soul which we have 
in Christ, or intend to restore the kings again to their 
duties and right, and to the room and authority which 
they have of God, and of shadows to make them kings 
in deed, and to put the world in his order again: then the 
kings deliver their swords and authority unto the hypocrites, 
to slay him. So drunken are they with the wine of 
the whore. 

The text that followeth, in Paul, will they haply lay 
to my charge and others. How shall they preach, except 
they be sent, saith Paul in the said xth to the Romans. We 
(will they say,) are the pope, cardinals and bishops: all 
authority is ours. The Scripture pertaineth unto us, and 

Bbbopa 
work tUeir 
treftsoQ 
UiTough 
coufesskia. 

Kmgj be 
sworn Ui 
the bi- 
□o£ tbe hi- 
Bb^p:i to 
ibe king*. 

How shnlt 
tbty 
|>reac1i ex- 
cept Ihi'y 
be sent, IS 
eximuaded. 


316
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

How to 
know who 
la Mnt of 
Gndf imd 
irho Ij noL 

Noman 
may irrpneh 
but he that 
ii mlled 
nad seat of 

is our possession. And we have a law, that whosoever 
presume to preach without the authority of the bishops, 
is excommunicate in the deed-doing. Whence, there- 
fore, hast thou thine authority? will they say. The old 
pharisees had the Scripture in captivity likewise, and 
asked Christ, By what authority doest thou these things? 
As who should say, we are pharisees, and thou art none of our 
order, nor hast authority of us. Christ asked them another 
question, and so will I do our hypocrites. Who sent you? 
God? Nay, he that is sent of God speaketh God's 
word. (John iii.) Now speak ye not God's word, nor 
any thing save your own laws, made clean contrary unto 
God's word. Christ's apostles preached Christ, and not 
themselves. He that is of the truth preacheth the truth. 
Now ye preach nothing but lies, and therefore are of 
the devil, the father of all lies, and of him are ye sent. 
And as for mine authority, or who sent me, I report me 
unto my works as Christ. (John v. and x.) If God's 
word bear record that I say truth, why should any man 
doubt, but that God, the father of truth and of light, hath 
sent me; as the father of lies and of darkness hath sent 
you, and that the Spirit of truth and of light is with me, 
as the spirit of lies and of darkness is with you? By this 
means thou wilt that every man be a preacher, will they say. 
Nay, verily. For God will that not, and therefore will 
I it not; no more than I would that every man of London 
were mayor of London, or every man of the realm king 
thereof. God is not the author of dissention and strife, 
but of unity and peace, and of good order. I will, there- 
fore, that where a congregation is gathered together in 
Christ, one be chosen after the rule of Paul, and that he 
only preach, and else no man openly; but that every man 
teach his household after the same doctrine. But if the 
preacher preach false: then whosoever's heart God moveth, 
to the same it shall be lawful to rebuke and improve the 
false teacher, with the clear and manifest Scripture, and 
that same is no doubt a true prophet sent of God. For 


TYNDALE.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 317

the Scripture is God's, and theirs that believe, and not 
the false prophet's. 

Sacrament is then as much to say as an holy sign. 
And the sacraments, which Christ ordained, preach God's 
word unto us; and therefore justify and minister the 
Spirit to them that believe, as Paul through preaching the 
gospel was a minister of righteousness, and of the Spirit, 
unto all that believed his preaching. Dumb ceremonies 
are no sacraments, but superstitiousness. Christ's sacra- 
ments preach the faith of Christ, as his apostles did, and 
thereby justify. Antichrist's dumb ceremonies preach not 
the faith that is in Christ, as his apostles, our bishops and 
cardinals, do not. But as antichrist's bishops are ordained 
to kill whosoever preach the true faith of Christ; so are 
his ceremonies ordained to quench the faith which Christ's 
sacraments preach. And hereby mayest thou know the
difference between Christ's signs or sacraments, and anti-
christ's signs or ceremonies — that Christ's signs speak, and
antichrist's be dumb.

Hereby seest thou what is to be thought of all other 
ceremonies — as hallowed water, bread, salt, boughs, bells, 
wax, ashes, and so forth; and all other disguisings and apes'- 
play; and of all manner [of] conjurations, as the conjuring 
of church and churchyards, and of altar-stones, and such like. 
Where no promise of God is, there can be no faith, nor jus- 
tifying, nor forgiveness of sins. For it is more than mad- 
ness to look for any thing of God, save that he hath pro- 
mised: how far he hath promised, so far is he bound to them 
that believe, and further not. To have a faith, therefore,
or a trust in any thing, where God hath not promised, is
plain idolatry, and a worshipping of thine own imagina-
tion instead of God. Let us see the pith of a ceremony
or two, to judge the rest by. In conjuring of holy 
water, they pray, that whosoever be sprinkled therewith 
may receive health as well of body as of soul: and like- 
wise in making holy bread, and so forth, in the con- 


318
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Hrtw the 
lipoe«tte« 

Reprntnncc 
And sure 
Tnith in 
Christ 
purfetb our 
81 nt. 

jurations of other ceremonies. Now we see by daily ex- 
perience, that half their prayer is unheard. For no man 
receiveth health of body thereby. No more, of likelihood, 
do they of soul. Yea, we see also by experience, that 
no man receiveth health of soul thereby. For no man by 
sprinkling himself with holy water, and with eating holy bread, 
is more merciful than before, or forgiveth wrong, or be- 
cometh at one with his enemy, or is more patient and less 
covetous, and so forth. Which are the sure tokens of the 
soul's health. 

They preach also that the wagging of the bishop's hand 
over us blesseth us, and putteth away our sins. Are these 
works not against Christ? How can they do more shame 
unto Christ's blood? For if the wagging of the bishop's 
hand over me be so precious a thing in the sight of God 
that I am thereby blessed, how then am I full blessed with 
all spiritual blessing in Christ? as Paul saith: (Eph. i.) 
Or if my sins be full done away in Christ, how remaineth 
there any to be done away by such phantasies? The 
apostles knew no ways to put away sin, or to bless us, but by 
preaching Christ. Paul saith (Gal. ii.) If righteousness 
come by the law, then Christ died in vain. So dispute I 
here: If blessing come by the wagging of the bishop's 
hand, then died Christ in vain, and his death blesseth us 
not. And a little afore saith Paul, If while we seek to be 
justified by Christ, we be yet found sinners, (so that we 
must be justified by the law or ceremonies) is not Christ 
then a minister of sin? So dispute I here: If while we 
seek to be blessed in Christ we are yet unblessed, and 
must be blessed by the wagging of the bishop's hand, what 
have we then of Christ but curse? Thou wilt say: when we 
come first to the faith, then Christ forgiveth us and 
blesseth us. But the sins which we afterward commit are 
forgiven us through such things. I answer, if any man 
repent truly, and come to the faith, and put his trust in 
Christ, then as oft as he sinneth of frailty, at the sigh of the 
heart is his sin put away in Christ's blood. For Christ's 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
319

blood purgeth ever and blesseth ever. For John saith in 
the second of his First Epistle, This I write unto you that 
ye sin not. And though any man sin (meaning of frailty, 
and so repent) yet have we an Advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ which is righteous, and he it is that obtaineth 
grace for our sins. And (Heb. vii.) it is written, But this 
man (meaning Christ) because he lasteth or abideth ever, 
hath an everlasting priesthood. Therefore is he able also 
ever to save them that come to God through him, seeing 
he ever liveth to make intercession for us. The bisbops 
therefore ought to bless us in preaching Christ, and not 
to deceive us and to bring the curse of God upon us with 
wagging their hands over us. To preach is their duty 
only, and not to offer their feet to be kissed, or testicles or 
stones to be groped. We feel also by experience that 
after the pope's, bishop's, or cardinal's blessing, we are 
no otherwise disposed in our souls than before. 

Let this be sufficient as concerning the sacraments and
ceremonies, with this protestation: that if any can say 
better or improve this with God's word, no man shall be 
better content therewith than I. For I seek nothing but 
the truth, and to walk in the light. I submit therefore this 
work and all other that I have made or shall make, (if 
God will that I shall more make) unto the judgments, 
not of them that furiously burn all truth, but of them 
which are ready with God's word to correct, if any thing 
be said amiss, and to further God's word. 

I will talk a word or two after the worldly wisdom with 
them, and make an end of this matter. If the sacraments 
justify, as they say, (I understand by justifying, forgiveness 
of sins,) then do they wrong unto the sacraments, inas- 
much as they rob the most part of them through confession 
of their effect, and of the cause wherefore they were or- 
dained. For no man may receive the body of Christ, no 
man may marry, no man may be oiled or anoiled as they call 
it; no man may receive orders, except he be first shriven. 
Now when the sins be forgiven by shrift aforehand, there 

t|jc Autlior. 

ConrcsiEiQii 
robbetli the 
pae rum cuts 
and maketh 
tlieQi fruit- 
Iras. 


320
THE OBEDIENCE
[TYNDALE.

What grace 

How to 
know irhjiC 
jiiftlfieih 
mid wl'Ai 
not ; or 
what bring- 
etU g;riice 
Hud wtij^l 

With their 
(!l)itptain«, 
qimlh Uc?* 
fio^d irivc 
tlipjr chap- 
IniiiH at tin; 
tmat mnke 
til em not so 
tiijiil to say 
H^rrice 
alone while 
they. 

is nought left for the sacraments to do. They will answer 
that at the leastway they increase grace, and not the sa- 
craments only, but also hearing of mass, matins and even- 
song; and receiving of holy water, holy bread, and of the 
bishop's blessing, and so forth by all ceremonies. By 
grace I understand the favour of God, and also the gifts 
and working of his Spirit in us; as love, kindness, 
patience, obedience, mercifulness, despising of worldly 
things, peace, concord, and such like. If after thou hast 
heard so many masses, matins, and evensongs; and after 
thou hast received holy bread, holy water, and the bishop's 
blessing, or a cardinal's or the pope's; if thou wilt be 
more kind to thy neighbour, and love him better than 
before; if thou be more obedient unto thy superiors; more 
merciful, more ready to forgive wrong done unto thee, 
more despisest the world, and more athirst after spiritual 
things; if after that a priest hath taken orders he be less 
covetous than before; if a wife after so many and oft pil- 
grimages be more chaste, more obedient unto her hus- 
band, more kind to her maids and other servants; if gen- 
tlemen, knights, lords, and kings and emperors, after they 
have said so often daily service with their chaplains, know 
more of Christ than before, and can better skill to rule their 
tenants, subjects, and realms christianly than before, and 
be content with their duties; then do such things increase 
grace. If not, it is a lie. Whether it be so or no, I report 
me to experience. If they have any other interpretations 
of justifying or grace, I pray them to teach it me. For I 
would gladly learn it. Now let us go to our purpose 
again. 


TYNDALE.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 321

OF MIRACLES AND WORSHIPPING OF SAINTS. 

ANTICHRIST shall not only come with lying signs,
and disguised with falsehood, but also with lying mira-
cles and wonders, saith Paul in the said place, (2 Thess. 
ii.) All the true miracles which are of God, are shewed (as 
I above rehearsed) to move us to hear God's word, and to 
stablish our faith therein: and to confirm the truth of 
God's promises, that we might without all doubting believe 
them. For God's word, through faith, bringeth the Spirit 
into our hearts and also life, as Christ saith, (John vi.) 
The words which I speak are spirit and life. The word 
also purgeth us and cleanseth us, as Christ saith, (John 
xv.) Ye are clean by the means of the word. Paul saith, 
(1 Tim. ii.) One God, one Mediator (that is to say, ad- 
vocate, intercessor, or an at-one-maker) between God and 
man: the man Christ Jesus which gave himself a ransom 
for all men. Peter saith of Christ (Acts iv.) Neither is there 
health in any other: neither yet also any other name 
given unto men wherein we must be saved. So now 
Christ is our peace, our redemption or ransom for our sins, 
our righteousness, satisfaction, and all the promises of God 
are yea and Amen in him; (2 Cor. i.) And we, for the 
infinite love which God hath to us in Christ, love him 
again, love also his laws, and love one another. And the
deeds which we henceforth do, do we not to make satisfaction
or to obtain heaven: but to succour our neighbour, to
tame the flesh, that we may wax perfect and strong men 
in Christ, and to be thankful to God again for his mercy, 
and to glorify his name. 

Contrariwise the miracles of antichrist are done to
pull thee from the word of God, and from believing his pro-
mises, and from Christ, and to put thy trust in a man, or a
ceremony wherein God's word is not. As soon as God's word 

VOL. ii. Y 


322
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

Re that 
teacbfth to 
trust iti A 
saint 11 ti 
fiJse pro- 
phet. 

Khouid ptay 
thKt pruy- 
etb for bU 
rif-i|^1ibour' 

is believed, the faith spread abroad, then cease the miracles 
of God. But the miracles of antichrist, because they are 
wrought by the devil, to quench the faith, grow daily more 
and more: neither shall cease until the world's end among 
them that believe not God's word and promises. Seest 
thou not how God loosed and sent forth all the devils in 
the old world among the heathen or Gentiles? and how 
the devils wrought miracles and spake to them in every 
image? even so shall the devil work falsehood by one craft 
or another, until the world's end among them that believe 
not God's word. For the judgment and damnation of him 
that hath no lust to hear the truth, is to hear lies, and to 
be stablished and grounded therein through false miracles; 
and he that will not see, is worthy to be blind, and he that
biddeth the Spirit of God go from him, is worthy to be 
without him. 

Paul, Peter, and all true apostles preached Christ only.
And the miracles did but confirm and stablish their
preaching, and those everlasting promises and eternal tes-
tament that God had made between man and him in
Christ's blood; and the miracles did testify also that they 
were true servants of Christ. Paul preached not himself,
he taught not any man to trust in him or his holiness, or in
Peter or in any ceremony, but in the promises which God 
hath sworn only; yea, he mightily resisteth all such false
doctrine both to the Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians,
and everywhere. If this be true (as it is true and nothing 
more true,) that if Paul had preached himself, or taught 
any man to believe in his holiness or prayer, or in any thing,
save in the promises that God hath made and sworn to
give us for Christ's sake, he had been a false prophet:
why am not I also a false prophet, if I teach thee to trust 
in Paul or in his holiness or prayer, or in any thing save 
in God's word, as Paul did? 

If Paul were here and loved me, (as he loved them 
his time of whom he was sent, and to whom he was a servant 
to preach Christ,) what good could he do for me or wish 


TYNDALE.]
A CHRISTIAN MAN.
323

me, but preach Christ and pray to God for me, to open 
mine heart, to give me his Spirit, and to bring me unto the 
full knowledge of Christ: unto which port or haven, when 
I am once come, I am as safe as Paul, fellow with Paul, 
joint heir with Paul of all the promises of God, and God's 
truth heareth my prayer as well as Paul's. I also now could 
not but love Paul and wish him good, and pray for him, 
that God would strengthen him in all his temptations and 
give him victory, as he would do for me. Nevertheless 
there are many weak and young consciences always in 
the congregation, which they that have the office to preach, 
ought to teach, and not to deceive them. 

What prayers pray our clergy for us, which stop us and 
exclude us from Christ, and seek all the means possible to 
keep us from knowledge of Christ! They compel us to 
hire friars, monks, nuns, canons, and priests, and to 
buy their abominable merits, and to hire the saints that 
are dead to pray for us, (for the very saints have they made 
hirelings also:) because that their offerings come to their 
profit. What pray all those? that we might come to the 
knowledge of Christ, as the apostles did? Nay verily, For 
it is a plain case, that all they which enforce to keep us 
from Christ, pray not that we might come to the know- 
ledge of Christ. And as for the saints, (whose prayer was, 
when they were alive, that we might be grounded, estab- 
lished and strengthened in Christ only) if it were of God 
that we should thiswise worship them contrary unto their 
own doctrine, I dare be bold to affirm, that by the means 
of their prayers we should have been brought long ago 
unto the knowledge of God and Christ again, though that 
these beasts had done their worst to let it. Let us there- 
fore set our hearts at rest in Christ and in God'a promises, 
for so I think it best; and let us take the saints for an en- 
sample only, and let us do as they both taught and did. 

Let us set God's promises before our eyes, and desire 
him for his mercy and for Christ's sake to fulfil them. 
And he is as true as ever he was, and will do it, as well 

Y 2 

The wetik 
shmkld be 
tAiisrht and 
not de- 
ceived. 

The spiri- 
tunLt)' pray 
n*il tliut U'c 
might comti 
to ilie 
knowledge 
of ChrbL 

Tlie Ramri 
arc but an 
example. 


324
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

as ever he did, for to us are the promises made as well 
to them. 

Moreover, the end of God's miracles is good; the end to 
these miracles are evil. For the oferings which are the 
cause of the miracles do but minister and maintain vice, 
sin, and all abomination, and are given to them that have 
too much; so that for very abundance they foam out their 
own shame, and corrupt the whole world with the stench 
of their filthiness. 

Thereto whatsoever is not of faith is sin. (Rom. xiv. 
Faith cometh by hearing God's word. (Rom. x.) When 
now thou fastest or doest any thing in the worship of any
saint, believing to come to the favour of God, or to be saved 
thereby if thou have God's word, then is it true faith and 
shall save thee. If thou have not God's word, then is it a
false faith, superstitiousness and idolatry, and damnable 
sin. 

Also in the collects of the saints, with which we pray
God to save us through the merits or deservings of the 
saints, (which saints yet were not saved by their own de- 
servings themselves) we say, per Christum dominum nos-
trum; that is, for Christ our Lord's sake. We say, Save us 
good Lord, through the saints' merits for Christ's sake.
How can he save us through the saints' merits for Christ's 
sake and for his deserving merits and love? Take an en- 
sample. A gentleman saith unto me, I will do the utter- 
most of my power for thee, for the love which I owe unto 
thy father. Though thou hast never done me pleasure, 
yet I love thy father well; thy father is my friend, and hath 
deserved that I do all that I can for thee. &c. Here is a 
testament and a promise made unto me in the love of my 
father only. If I come to the said gentleman in the name 
of one of his servants which I never saw, never spake with, 
neither have any acquaintance at all with, and say: Sir, 
I pray you be good master unto me in such a cause. I
have not deserved that he should so do. Nevertheless I
pray you do it for such a servant's sake: yea, I pray you


TYNDALE.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 325

for the love that you owe to my father, do that for me for
such a servant's sake. If I thiswise made my petition,
would not men think that I came late out of St. Patrick's
purgatory, and had left my wits behind me? This do we.
For the Testament and promises are all made unto us in
Christ. And we desire God to fulfil his promises for
the saints' sake: yea, that he will for Christ's sake, do it
for the saints' sake.

They have also martyrs which never preached God's
word, neither died therefore: but for privileges and liber-
ties which they falsely purchased contrary unto God's or-
dinances. Yea, and such saints, though they be dead,
yet rob now as fast as ever they did, neither are less co-
vetous now than when they were alive. I doubt not but that
they will make a saint of my lord cardinal, after the death
of us that be alive, and know his juggling and crafty con-
veyance, and will shrine him gloriously, for his mightily
defending of the right of the holy church, except we
diligent to leave a commemoration of that Nimrod be- 
hind us. 

The reasons wherewith they prove their doctrine are
but fleshly: and as Paul calleth them, Enticing words of
man's wisdom; that is to wit, sophistry and brawling argu-
ments of men with corrupt minds and destitute of the truth,
whose God is their belly, unto which idol whosoever offer-
eth not, the same is an heretic, and worthy to be burnt. 

The saint was great with God when he was alive, as it 
appeareth by the miracles which God shewed for him; he 
must therefore be great now, say they. This reason ap- 
peareth wisdom, but it is very foolishness with God. For 
the miracle was not shewed that thou should put thy trust
in the saint, but in the word which the saint preached; 
which word, if thou believest, would save thee, as God 
hath promised and sworn, and would make thee also great 
with God, as it did the saint. 

If a man have a matter with a great man, or a king, he 
must go first unto one of his mean servants, and then higher 


326
THE OBEDIENCE OF
[TYNDALE.

and higher till he come at the king. This enticing argument 
is but blind reason of man's wit. It is not like in the
kingdom of the world, and in the kingdom of God and 
Christ. 

With kiiigSj for the most part, we ha\e none acquaint- 
ance, neither promise. They be also ino^^t commonly 
mercile^^* Moreover if they promise, they are vet meu» 
as uncoils tan t as are other people , and as nntrue. But 
\\ith God, if we hase belief, we are accounted, and hav^ 
an open way in unto him by the door Christ, which is 
never shut, but tljrongh unbelief; neither is there any por 
ter to keep any man out. By him, saith Paul, (Eph. ii 
that is to say, by Ctirist, we have an open way iti unto the.^ 
Father* So are ye now no more strangers and foreigne 
(saith he) but citizens with tlie saints, and of tlic house- 
hold of God. God hath also made us promises, and hath 
sworn : yea, hath made a testament or a covenant, and hath 
hound himself, and hath sealed his obligation with Christ's 
blood, and continued it with miracles. He is also merci- 
tul and kind, and coniplaineth that we will not come unto 
him. He is mighty and able to perform that he promiset 
He is true, and cannot be but true, as he catmot be b 
God, Therefore is it not like with the king and God, 

We be sinners, say they, God will not hear us. Behold 
how they flee from God as from a tyrant merciless. Whom 
a man counteth most merciful^ unto him he soonest tiieth. 
But these teachers dare not come at God* Why? fi 
they are the children of Cain. If the saints love whom' 
God hatetli, Uien God and his saints are divided, W hen^i 
thou prayest to the saints, how do they know^ eiccept tbi^H 
God whom thou cnuntest merciless, tell them ? If God Itie^^ 
so cruel and so hatetli thee, it is not likely that he will t 
the saints that thou prayesi unto tliem. 

When they say we be sinners : I answer, that Christ is 
no sinner^ save a satisfaction, and an otfering for sin* 
Take Christ from the saints and what are they I what is 
Paul without Christ 1 Is he any thing save a blasphemei 



itO^j 

M 
[>m 
th.^1 

om^i 

in 



TvXi>ALP.] 



A CHltiSTlAK MAN, 



3<I7 



man BDoncr 



the idoU* 
trv of hi* 
own iru.igi-^ 
nntion. 



Ji jjersecutor, s murderer, and a shedder of Ctiristian blood ? 

But as soon as he came to Clirist he wai* no more a sinner, 

but a minister of righteousncas : he nent not to Rome to 

take penance upon him, but went and preached unto his 

brethren the same mercy, which he had received free, 

without doing penance or hiring of saints, or of monks, or 

friarSi Moreover^ if it be God's word that thou should 

put thy trust in the saints^ merits or prayers, tlien be bold. 

For God's word shall defend thee and save thee* If it be 

but thine o^n reason, then fear* For God conimandeth 

by Mosesj (Deut, xii.) saying: What 1 command you, 

tliat observe and do^ and put nothing to, nor take ought 

therefrom : yea, and Moses wameth straightly in an Imndred 

places^ that we do that only which God commandethj and 

which scemeth jrood and rijehteous in his sight, and not in *^ coufu- 

our own Sights ror nothmg bringeth the wrath of tiod 

so soon and so sore on a man» m the idolatry of his own 

imagination. 

Last of all, these arguments are contrary' to the argu- 
ments of Christ and of his apostles* Christ disputeth 
(Luke xi,) saying. If the son ask the father bread, will he 
give him a stone ? oi' if he ask him fish, will he give him m 
i^eipeut ? and so fortlr. If ye then (saith he,) which are 
evil can give good gifts to your children, how much rather 
shall your heavenly Father give a good spirit unto them 
that ask him / And a little before in the same chapter he 
saithf If a man came never so out of season to his neigh- 
bour lo borrow bread, even when he is in his chamber, 
and tlie door shut, and all liis senants with him ; never- 
thelessi yet if he continue knocking and praying, he will 
ri^e and give him as much as he needeth, though not for 
love, yet to be rid of him, that he may have rest. As who 
should say, What t\ ill God do if a man pray him, seeing 
til at prayer overcometh an e\ il man ? Ask, therefore, 
(saith he,) and it shall be given you ; seek, and ye shall 
find ; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. And 
(Luke itviii,) he putteth forth the parable, or similitude^ 




398 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[Tv>;dali:, 



of the \% irked judge, which was overcome with the im- 
portunate prayer of the widow. And conckideth, saying. 
Hear wiiat the wicked judge did. And shall not God 
a%eiige iiis electa which cry unto him nigitt and day 1 
\Vhether, tlierefore, v,'e complain of the intolerable o|j- 
pression and persecution that we stifter, or of the llesh that 
ciimbreth and resisteth the Spirit, God is merciful to he4ir 
U9, and to help us. See^l thon not also how Christ cureth 
many, and casteth out devQs out of many, unspoken to, 
how shall he not help, if he be desired and spoken to ? 

\^ hen the old Pharisees (whose nature is to drive 
dinners from Christy) asked Christ why he did eat with 
publicans and sinners ? Chrii^t answered, That the w hole 
needed not Uie physician, but the sick ; that is, he came to 
have conversation with sinners to heal them* He was a 
gift given unto sinners, and a treasure to pay their debti. 
And Christ sent the com plaining and disdaining Pharisees 
Godlorcili to the prophet ITosea, raying, Go and learn what this 
meaneth ; I desire, or require mercy, and not sacrifice* As 
who should SUV, Ye Pliariaees love sacrifice and offering 
for to feed that god your bellies withal, but God com- 
mandeth to be mercifuK Sinners are ever captives, and 
u prey to the Pharisees and hypocrites for to offer unlu 
their bellies, and to buy merits, pardons, and forgivettess 
of sins of them* And llierefore fear they diem away from 
Christ, with arguments of their belly-wisdom. For be 
that receiveth forgiveness free of Christ, will buy no for- 
giveness of them^ i came (saith Christ,) to call, not the 
righteous, but the sinners unto repentance- Tht:- Pha- 
risees are righteous, and therefore have no part ^vith Christ, 
neither need they; for they are gods themselves and 
saviours. But sinners that repent pertain to Christ. 
If we repent, Christ hadi made satisfaction for ua 
already. 

God so loved the world that he gave his only Son, that 
none that believe on him should perish, but should have 
everlasting Ufe* For God sent not his 5§on into the ivorld 



GMitka 
gfftgtven 



mercy, 
Hyporfite-4 
lave offer- 
ings* 



^1 



Tyndale.] 



A CHRISTIAN IVMN. 



3^9 



to condemn the world, but that the world through him 
might be saved. He that believeth on him shall not be 
damned; but be diat believeth not is damned already. 
(Johniii.) 

Paul (Rom. v.) saitli, Because we are justified through 
faithy we are at peace with God through our Ix)rd Jesus 
Christ ; that is, because that God, which cannot lie, hath 
promised and sworn to be merciful unto us, and to for- 
give us for Christ's sake, we believe, and are at peace in 
our consciences ; we run not hither and thither for pardon ; 
we trust not in this friar nor that monk, neither in any- 
thing, save in the word of God only. As a child, when 
his father threateneth him for his fault, hath never rest till 
he hear the word of mercy and forgiveness of his father's 
mouth again ; but as soon as he heareth his father say, 
Go thy way, do me no more so, I forgive thee this fault : 
Aen is his heart at rest — then is he at peace, — then 
runneth he to no man to make intercession for him. 
Neither, though there come any false merchant, saying. 
What wilt thou give me, and I will obtain pardon of thy 
father for thee ? will he suffer himself to be beguiled. 
No, he will not buy of a wily fox for that which his father 
hath given him freely. 

Jt followed!, God setteth out his love that he hath to us ; 
that is, he maketh it appear, that men may perceive love if 
they be not more than stock blind. Inasmuch (saith 
Paul,) as while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 
Much more now, (saith he,) seeing we are justified by his 
blood, shall we be preserved from wrath through him: 
for if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God, 
by the death of his Son ; much more, seeing we are recon- 
ciled, we shall be preser\'ed by his life. As who should 
say, If God loved us when we knew him not, much more 
loveth he us now we know him. If he were merciful to 
us while we hated his law, how much more merciful will 
he be now, seeing we love it, and desire strength to fulfil 
it. And in the viiith he argueth, if God spared not his 



We arc at 
peace in 
our con- 
sciences 
when we 
believe 
constantly 
oar sins are 
remitted 
through 
Jesus 
Christ. 



sao 



THE OJiEDlENCE OF 



[J VM>ALK*1 



Why we 

€orne not 
to Christ, 



God look- 
«th on our 

good dec (J 3. 



AnticLmC 
tuniftli tlic 
routs of the 
treei tip- 
wiird. 



own Son, but gave him for u^ all^ liow shidi he not with 
Jjim gi\ii us alJ things also ? 

Chmt pra^eth (John xvli*) uot for the apostles only, but 
also for as mauy as should believe through their preachings 
and was heard ; whatsoever we ask in his name the Fa titer 
giveth us. (John xvi.) Christ is also as njerdful aj the 
faints* Why go we not straightway unto him? Verily, 
because we feel not the mercy of God, neither believe bis 
truth. God will at the leastway (say they,) hear us tbe 
sooner for the saints' sake. Then lovedi he the saints 
better than Christ, and his own truth- Hearctli he us for 
the stiints' sake 1 so heareth he ns not for his mercy ; for 
merits and mercy cannot stand together* 

Finally : If thou put any trust ttt thine own deeds ^ or 
in the deeds of any otlier man, of any saint, then minishest 
thou the truths mercy, and goodness of God. For if God 
look unto thy works, or unto the works of any other muUf 
or goodness of the saint, then doth he not all things of 
pure mercy and of his goodness, and for the trutli's sake, 
wliich lie hatli sworn in Christ. Now aaith Paul, (Tit iii.) 
not of the righteous deeds which we did, but of his 
mercy saved he us. 

Our blind disputers will say. If our good deeds justify 
us not ; if God look not on our good deeds, neither regard 
them, nor love us the better for them, what need we to do 
good deeds? I answer, God looketh on our good deeds, 
and loveth them ; yet loveth us not for their sakes. God 
loveth us first in Christ of his goodness and mercy, and 
poureth his Spirit into us, and givedi us power to do good 
deeds. And because he loveth us, he loveth our good 
deeds ; yea, because lie lovetli us, he forgiveth us our evil 
deeds, which we do of frailly, and not of purpose og for 
the Donce. Our good deeds do but testify only that we 
are justitied and beloved. For except we were beloved^ 
and had God's Spirit, we could neither do^ nor yet coo- 
sent imto any good deed. Antichrist tumeth the roots of 
the trees up^^ard. He maketh the goodness of God the 



4 
4 



Tyndale.] 



A CHRISTIAN MAN. 



branches^ and our goodiiess the roots. We must be first 
good after antichrist's doctrine, and move God, and com- 
pel him to be good again for our goodness' sake : so must 
God's goodness spring out of our goodness. Nay, verily, 
God's goodness is the root of all goodness ; and our good- 
ness, if we have any, springetli out of his goodness. 



OF PRAYER. 



331 



f\F prayer and good deeds, and of the order of love, or 
charity, I have abundantly written in my book of the 
Justifying of Faith. Neverthelater, that thou mayest see 
what the prayers and good works of our monks and friars, 
and of other ghostly people, are worth, 1 will speak a 
word or two, and make an end. Paul saith, (Gal. iii.) 
AU ye are the sons of God through faith in Jesus Christ ; 
for all ye that are baptized have put Christ on you ; that 
is, ye are become Christ himself. There is no Jew, (saith 
he,) neither Greek, neither bond nor free, neither man nor 
woman, but ye are all one thing in Christ Jesus. In Christ 
there is neither French nor English ; but the Frenchman 
b the Englishman's ownself, and the English the French- 
man's ownself. In Christ there is neither father nor son, 
neither master nor servant, neither husband nor wife, 
neither king nor subject ; but the father is the son's self, 
and the son the father's ownself; and the king is the sub- 
ject's ownself, and the subject is the king's ownself ; and 
so forth. I am thou thyself, and thou art I myself, and can 
be no nearer of kin. We are all the sons of God, all 
Christ's servants bought with his blood ; and every man 
to other, Christ his ownself. And (Col. iii.) Ye have put 
on the new man, which is renewed in the knowledge of 
God, after the image of him that made him (that is to say, 
Christ ;) where is (saith he,) neither Greek nor Jew, cir- 



In Christ 
we are one 
as good as 
another, 
equally be- 
lored, and 
indiflfie- 
rently 
heard. 




39v 



THE OBEDIKNCE OF 



[Tvsimj;k. 



Cbrbt 19 

all ton 

CKrLttiah 

wail* 



The cliil- 
dfe» of 
ftitli work 

of JOtCj UJlJ 

tilled no 
Iaw' to 
eomtjcl 

Wo lire nil 
CbrUt's 

Bud serve 



Tbe con- 
tempt or 

lore WB 
ihew Ode 
to niiothi'r, 
Ibe mmtx 
ihew wc to 
CliriBL 



cunicisiuu nor uiicireuiiicisioti^ barbaruus ur Scythian, bond 
or free ; but Christ is all in all tliitigis. I lo\e Uiee not 
now because thou art my fa l her, and hast done so much 
far me ; or tny mother, and hast bonie me, and given tni.' 
suck of thy breaMs, (for no do Jens and Saracens,) but 
because of the great love that Ctirist hath j^he^^ed me. I 
sene thee, not because tliou ail my master, or my king, 
for ho|je of reward, or fear of pain, but for the love of 
Christ ; for the children of failli are under no law {as 
thou see^t in tlie Epistles to the Romans, to the Gslatiaus, 
ill tlie first to Timothy,) but aie free* The Spirit of Christ 
liatli v^ritteu the lively law of love in their liearts, which 
drive th tlietn to work of their own accord freely and w il- 
lingly, for tlie great love's sake only vihich Uiey see in 
Christ J and therefore need they no law to compel them* 
Christ is all in all things to them that believe, atid the cause 
of all love. Paul saitli (Eph. vi.) Servants, obey unto 
your carnal or fleshly masters, with fear and trembling, in 
singleness of your hearts as unto Christ : not w ith eye- 
service, as men-pleasers, btit as the servants of Christ, 
doing the will of God from the heart, even as thouglj ye 
served the Lord, and not men. And remember, that 
whatsoever good thing any man doth, that shall ha receive 
again of llie Lord, whether he be bond or free. Christ 
thus is all hi all things, and cause of all to a ChrisMan man* 
And Christ aaiUi, (Matt, xxv.) Inasmuch as je have done 
it to any of the least of these my brethren, ye have done 
it tome, And inasmuch as ye have not done it unto one 
of tlic least of these^ ye liave not done it to me. Here 
s^st tliou that we are Christ's brethren^ and even Christ 
himself; and whatsoever we do one to another, that do we 
to Christ, If we lie in Christ, we work for no worldly 
purpose, but of love. As Paul saith (£ Cor. v.) The love 
of Christ compellelh m : (as who should say, we work 
not of a fleshly purpose:) for (saitli he,) we know hence- 
forth no man fleshly ; no, though we once knew Christ 
fleshly, we do so now no more. We are otherwise miuded 



1 
I 
I 
I 
I 



TVNOiLK,] 



A CHRISTIAN MAN. 



533 



than when Peter drew his sword to tight with Cln i^t. We 
are naw resdy to suffer with CUrbt, and to lose life and 
all for our very enemies to bring them untO Christ. If we 
be ill Christ, we are minded like unto Chri. , wliicb knew 
nothing fleshly^ or after the will of the fleshy aj thou see»t 
Matt. xii. when one said to him; Lo, thy mother and thy 
brethren stand without, desiring to speak with tliee* He 
answered, W bo is my mother, and who are ray brethren ? 
And stretched his handover his disciples, saying, See, my 
motiier and my breth en : for whosoever doth the w^Jll of 
my Father which is in lieaveii, the same is my brother, ray 
sister, and my mother. He knew not his mother in that 
she bare him, but in that she did the will of his Father iii 
heaven* So now, as God the Father's will and com- 
raandment is aJl to Christ, even so Christ is all to a 
Christian math 

Chjist i^ the cause why I love thee, why i am ready to 
do the uttermost of my power for thee, and why I pray for 
thee* And as long as tlie cause abideth, so long lasteth 
the effect : even as it is always day, so long as the sun 
shine th,. Do therefore the worst thou canst unto me, take 
away my goods, take aw ay my gooil name : yet as long 
as Christ remaineth in my heart, so long I love thee not a 
whit the less, and so long art thou as dear unto me aj^ 
mine own soul, and so long am I ready to do thee good 
for thine evil, and so long 1 pray for thee with all my 
heart ; for Christ desireth it of me, and hath deserved it 
of me. Thine unkindness compared unto his kindness is 
nothing at all ; yea, it is swallowed up as a little smoke of a 
mighty wind, ai^i is no more seen or thought upon. 
Moreover that evil which thoit didst to me, I receive not 
of thy hand, but of the hand of God, and as GodS 
scourge to teach me patience, and to nurture me. And 
tlierefore have no cause to be angry with thee, more than 
die child hath to be angry with his father's rod : or a sick 
man with a sour or bitter medicine that healetli liim, or a 
prisoner with his fetters, or he that is punished lawfully 



Christ 
knaweCU 
runXung 
worhllvt no 
not his very 



As lon^ JM 
Christ nbid- 
elh, so lonf 
& Chmeiiiu 
mm hn^ih. 



334 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[Tyiiij,u*e. 



Moncjr 
bindctfa not 
chriBtian 
people ta 
pr»y. 



Ibrliit. 



The belly la 

cause of dl 
unto our 
aplriluidty. 



wjtii Uie officer that putiisfbeth hini, Tbus is Christ all 
and the whole cause why I love thee. And to alt can 
nouglit he added « Therefore caunot a little money make 
me love thee better, or more bound to pray for tJiee, nor 
make God's commaiKimeiit greater. Last of all, if I be 
in Clirist, tlien the love of Christ compelleth me. And 
therefore I am ready to give thee miue, and not to take 
thine from thee. If I be able 1 will do thee service freely : 
if not, then if thou minis ter to me again^ that receive I of 
the hand of God, which minislerelli it to me by thee : for 
God careth for hh^ and mini»teretli all things tmto them, 
and moveth Turks, and Saracens, and all manner [of] infi- 
dels to do tliem good ; as thou seest in Abraham^ Isaaci 
and Jacob, and how God went with Joseph into Egypt, 
and gat him favour in the prison, and in every place, which 
favour Joseph received of the hand of God, and to God 
gave the thanks. This la God and Christ ail in all, good 
and bad receive I of God* Them tliat are good I love, 
because they are in Christ, and tlie evil, to bring them to 
Christ* When any mun dotli well 1 rejoice that God is 
honoured, and when any man dotli evil, I sorrow because 
that God is dishonoured, I'inally, inasmuch as God 
hath created all, and Christ bought all with bin bloody 
therefore ought all to seek God and Christ in all, and else 
nothing. 

But contrariwise unto monks, friars, and to the other of 
our holy spiritualty^ the belly is all in all, and cause of all 
love. Offer thereto, so art thou father, mother, sister, and 
brother unto them, Oflerest thou not, so know they thee 
not J thou art neither father, mother, sifter, brollier, nor 
any kin at all to them. She is a sister of ours, he is a 
brother of ours, say they ; he is verily a good man, for be 
doth much for our religion. She is a mother to our con- 
vent : we be greatly bound to pray for ihenu And as for 
such and auch, (say they) we know not whether tbey be 
good or bad, or whether they be fish or flesh, for they do 
nought for us: we be more bound to pray for our bene- 



Tynualj:.] 



A CHRISTIAN MAN. 



335 



factors (say they) and for thetii that give us, than for them 
thtt give us not. For them tliat give little p are they little 
bound, and them they love lillle ; and for them that give 
much, they are much bouud, atid them they love itmch. 
And for them that give nought, are they nought bouud^ 
and them tliey love not at all. ' And as they love thee 
when thou ^vest, so hate tiiey tliee when lliou takest 
away from tljeni, and nm all under a stool, and curse thee 
as black as pitch. So ih ch>ister love belly^ove, cloifiler 
prayer belly-prayer, and cloister brotherhood belly-bro- 
therhood. Moreover, love that springeth of Christ seeketh 
not her ownself, (1 Cor. xiii.) but forgetteth herself, and 
bestoweth her upon her neighbour's profit, as Christ sought 
our profit, and not his own. He s^ought not the favour of 
God for himself, but for us ; yea, he took the wrath and 
vengeance of God from us unto himself, and bare it on his 
own back, to bring us unto favour. Likewise doth a 
Christian man give to his brethren, and robbeth them not 
as friars ami monks do : but as Paul conmiandeth, 
( Eph. iv.) laboureth with his hands some good work to have 
wherewitii to help the needy. They give not, but receive 
only. They labour not, but live idly of the sweat of the 
poor. There is none so poor a widow, though she have 
not lo find herself and her children, nor any money to give, 
yet shall the friar snatch a cheese, or somewhat* They 
preach, sayest thou, and labour in the word* First, I say, 
they are not called, and therefore ought not: for it is the 
curate's office. The curate cannot sayest thou* What 
doth the thief there then ? Secondarily, a true preacher 
preach eth Christ's Testament only, and maketh Christ the 
cause and reward of all our deeds, and teacheth eveiy man 
to bear his cross willmgly for Christ's sake* But these 
are enemies unto the cross of Christ, and preach their 
belly, which is their God: (Phil, iii.) and they think that 
lucre is the serving of God. (l Tim. vi.) That is, they 
think them Christian only which offer unto their bellies, 
f which when thou hast filled, then spue they out prayers 



AU Is of 
tbc belly, 

of Cbrist* 

Cbriai'H 
lo¥e forgets 

tetb her- 
seMt but 
monks' lare 
tbiiikt^tb an 
tie belly* 




Fpjuri atid 
monks 
ought not 
la |ife.icb. 




nm 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[TVNUALft. 



ChriBt i» 
the wholi? 
caaac irby 

111. 



How t0 

know lb«t 
we are 
God*^! soni. 
Tbe Uw is 
th« mnrk : 
^PA^ Antt 

itone 

we QUgbt 
Icj try our- 
selves J iiDf] 
see how fiir 
forth wo 



Our hirtb 
poUon tbal 

remiiiiieib 
ia »« re* 



for thee, to be tbv reward, and yet wot not what prayer i 
nieanetii. Prayer h the longing for Go<i*s prottibes, 
which promise^^ as they preach them not, so long ihey nut 
for them, nor wisli them unto any man* Their longing is 
to fill their paunch whom they sene* and not Christ : and 
through sweet preaching and tlattering words deceive the 
liearts of the sunple and unlearued* (Roid« itvi,) 

Finally, as Christ is the whole cause why we do all 
thing for our neighbour, even so is he the cause why God 
doih all thing for us, why he receiveth us into his haly 
testament, and maketh us heirs of all his promises, and 
poureth his Spirit into ns, and maketh xin his sons, and 
fashionetli us like unto Christ, and maketh us such as be 
would have us to be. The assumnce tliat we are the son^^ 
beloved J and heirs with Christ, and have God*s Spirit in 
us, is the consent of our hearts unto the law of GckJ. 
Which law is all perfection, and the mark whereat all we 
ought to shoot. And he tiiat hittetb ttiat mark, so tltat 
he fultilletli the law with all his heart, soul, and might, and 
with full love and lust, widiout all let or resistance, is pure 
gold, and needeth nol to be put any more in llie fire ; he is 
straight and right, and needeth to be no more shaven : he 
is full fashioned like Christ, and can have no more added 
unto him. Neveithele^s tliere is none so perfect in ihis 
life, that findeth not let and resistance by the reason of ori- 
ginal sin, or birth poison that remaineth in him, as tht»u 
may est see in the lives of all the saints throughout all the 
Scripture, and in Paul, (Rom. vii,) The will is present, 
(saith he) but 1 find no means to perform that which is 
good. 1 do not that good thing which I would ; but that 
evil do I which I would not. I find by tlie law that when 
[ would do good, evil is present widi me. ( delight in the 
law, as concerning the iimermaii, but ] 6nd another law 
in my members rebelling against the law of my mind, and 
subduhig me unto the law of sin. W hich law of sin is 
nothing but a corrupt and a poisoned nature which break* 
eth into evil hists, and from evil lusts into w icked deeds, and 



TrNDALB.] 



A CHRISTUN MAN. 



337 



must be purged with the true purgatory of the cross of 
Christ : that is, thou must hate it with all thine heart, and 
desire God to take it from thee. And tlien whatsoever 
cross God putteth on thy back, bear it patiently, whetlier 
it be poverty, sickness, or persecution, or whatsoever it be, 
and take it for the right purgatory, and think that God 
hath nailed thee fast to it, to purge thee thereby. For he 
diat loveth not the law and hateth his sin, and hath not 
professed in his heart to fight against it, and moumeth not 
to God to take it away and to purge him of it, the same 
hath no part with Christ. If thou love the law and find- 
est that thou hast yet sin hanging on thee, whereof thou 
sorrowest to be delivered and purged : as for an ensample, 
thou hast a covetous mind, and mistrustest God, and 
dierefore art moved to beguile thy neighbour, and art unto 
him merciless, not caring whether he sink or swim, so thou 
mayest win by him or get from him that he hath : then get 
diee to the observant which is so purged from that sin, 
that he .will not once handle a penny, and with that wile 
doth the subtle fox make the goose come flying into his 
hole, ready prepared for his mouth without his labour or 
sweat ; and buy of his merits, which he hath in store, and 
give thy money not into his holy hands, but to offer him 
that he hath hired either with part of his prayers or part 
of his prey, to take the sin upon him and to handle his 
money for him. In like manner, if any person that is un- 
der obedience unto God's ordinance (whether it be son, or 
daughter, servant, wife or subject) consent unto the ordi- 
nance, and yet find contrary motions : let him go also to 
them that have professed an obedience of their own making, 
and buy part of their merits. If thy wife give thee nine 
words for three, go to the charterhouse and buy of their 
silence : and so if the abstaining of the observant from 
handling money, heal thine heart from desiring money, 
and the obedience of them that will obey nothing but their 
own ordinance, heal tliy disobedience to God's ordinance, 
and the silence of the charterhouse monk tame thy wife's 

VoLi II. z 



The right 
cross of 
Christ. 



He that 
loveth not 
the law and 
hateth sin, 
hath no 
part with 
Christ. 

How to try 
the doc- 
trine of 
oor spiri* 
tualty. 



If the pray- 
ers and 
merits of 
our reli- 
gious men 
purge out 
lusts, then 
are they of 
value, and 
else not. 



338 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[TYXtJALE. 



Wljflt tbc 

tpifituftliy 

taketh 

away with 

their 

prajcri. 

Whcnotlicr 
weepj they 
umgf and 
wbea otbcr 
lose^ they 
win. 



AtHior 

pQrgatory. 
The»c phy- 

bo DC other 
medicinei 
aave pur^- 
tiom oaly. 



tongue, then believe iliat iheir prayere shall deliver tiiy 
Boul from the pains of that terrible and fearful purgatory 
which they have feigned to purge thy purse withal. 

The spiritualty increaseth daily- More prelates, more 
priests, more monkaj friars, cations, nuns, and more heretics ; 
I would say heremites, with like dniff. Set before thee the iti- 
crease of St* Fraucis's disciples in so few years. Reckon how 
many thousands, yea, how many twenty thousands, not dis- 
ciples only ; but whose cloisters are sprung out of hell of 
them in so little space. Pattenngof prayers encreasetb 
daily. Tlieir service, as tliey call it, waxeth longer and 
longer, and the labour of their lips greater ; new saints ^ 
new service, new feasts, and new holidays. What take 
all tliese away? Sin? Nay, For we see the contmiy 
by experience, and that sin groweth as they grow* But 
they take away first God^s word with faith, hope, peace, 
unity, love and concord ; then house and land, r^it and 
fee, tower and town, goods and cattle, and the very meat 
out of men's mouths. All these live by purgatoryp \^lien 
other weep for their friends, they sing merrily ; when 
other loose their friends, tliey get friends. The pope with 
all liis pardons is grounded on purgatorj. Priests, monks, 
canons, friars, with all other swarms of hypocrites, do but 
empty purgatory, and fill helL Every mass, say tiiey, de* 
liveretli one soul out of purgatory, [f that were true, 
yea, if ten masses were enough for one soul, yet were the 
parish priests and curates of every parish sufficient ta 
scour purgalor)'. All the other costly work of men might 
be well spared, 



Tyndalb.] a christian MAN. 339 

THE FOUR SENSES OF THE SCRIPTURE. 



'pHEY divide the Scripture into four senses, the literal, 
tropological, allegorical, and auagogical. The literal 
sense is become nothing at all. For the pope hath taken 
it clean away, and hath made it his possession. He hath 
partly locked it up with the false and counterfeited keys 
of his traditions, ceremonies, and feigned lies. And partly 
driveth men from it with violence of sword. For no man 
dare abide by the literal sense of the text, but under a 
protestation, if it shall please the pope. The chopolo- 
gical sense pertaineth to good manners (say they) and 
teacheth what we ought to do. The allegory b appro* 
pfiate to faith ; and the anagogical to hope and things 
above. Tropological and anagogical are terms of their 
own feigning, and altogether unnecessary. For they are 
but allegories both two of them, and this word allegory 
comprehendeth them both, and is enough. For tropolo- 
gical is but an allegory of manners, and anagogical, an 
aOq^oiy of hope. And allegory is as much to say as ^P^f?5^.* . 
strange speaking, or borrowed speech. As when we say nifieth. 
of a wanton child, this sheep hath magots in his tail, he 
must be anointed with birchen salve; which speech I 
borrow of the shepherds. 

Thou sKalt understand, therefore, that the Scripture hath The Scrip- 
but one sense, which is the literal sense. And that literal but one 
sense is the root and ground of all, and the anchor that never **'^*®- 
fiuleth, whereunto if thou cleave thou canst never err, or 
go out of the way. And if thou leave the literal sense, 
thou canst not but go out of the way. Neverthelater, 
the Scripture useth proverbs, similitudes, riddles, or alle- 
gories, as all other speeches do ; but that which the pro- 
verb, similitude, riddle, or allegory signifieth is ever the 
literal sense which thou must seek out diligently. As in 

z 2 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[Tyxi^alk, 



Borrowed 



the Englifih, Me liorrovv words and setitences of one tliiitg, 
and apjply them ujita another, and give them new signifi* 
cations. We saj. Let the sea rise as high as he vv-U, yet 
hath God appointed how far he shall go : meaning ttint 
tlie tyrants shall not do what they would , but that only 
which God liath appointed them to do. Look ere thou leap: 
whose literal sense is, Do nothing suddenly^ or witliont 
avisemeut. Cut not the bough that thou standeet ujk^r : 
whose literal sense is^ Oppress not the commons ; and is 
borrov^*ed of hewers. When a tiling speedeth not well, we 
borrow speech, and say, The bishop hath blessed it, because 
tltat notlung speedetii well that they meddle with withaU 
If the porridge be burned too, or the meat over roasted, 
we say, the bishop hath put his foot in the pot, or the 
bishop hath played the cook, because the bishops bum 
whom they lust, and whomsoever displeaseth them. He is a 
pontifical fellow, tliat is, proud and stately^ He is popish^ 
tliat is, superstitious and faithless. It is a pastime for a 
prelate. It is a pleasure for a pope. He would be frce^ 
and yet will not have head shaven* He would that uo 
man should smite him, and yet hath not the pope's mark^ 
And of him is betrayed, and wottetb not how, we say* he 
hatli been at shrift. She is master parson^s sister's daughter ; 
he is the bishop's sister's son ; he hath a cardinal to his 
uncle ; she is a spiritual whore ; it is the gentle worn un of 
the parsonage ; he gave me a Kyrie ele^mn* And of her 
that answerL^tlt her husband six words for one, we aay. 
She is a sister of the charter-house : as who should say. 
She thinketh that she is not bound to keep silence, their 
silence shall be a satisfaction for her. And of him that 
will not be saved by Christ's merits, but by the works of 
his own imagination, we say it is a holy workman. Thus 
borrow we, and feign new speech in every tongue, AH 
fables, prophecies, and riddles, are allegories ; as Esop's 
fables, and Merlin's prophecies, and the interpretation of 
them are tlie literal sense. 

So in like manner the Scripture borroweili words and 



Tyxdale.] a christian MAN. 341 

sentences of all mannei [of] things, and maketh proverbs 
and similitudes or allegories. As Christ saitli, (Luke iv.) 
: Physician, heal thyself : whose interpretation is, do that at 
home, which thou dost in strange places ; and that is the 
literal sense. So when I say, Christ is a lamb ; 1 mean 
not a lamb that beareth wool, but a meek and a patient 
Lamb which is beaten for other men's faults. Christ is a 
vine, not that beareth grapes ; but out of whose root the 
branches that believe suck the Spirit of life, and mercy, 
and grace, and power to be the sons of God, and to do 
his will. The similitudes of the gospel are allegories The right 
borrowed of worldly matters to express spiritual things. ««« of alle- 
The Apocalypse or Revelations of John are allegories 
whose literal sense is hard to find in many places. 

Beyond all this, when we have found out the literal sense 
of the Scripture, by the process of the text, or by a like 
text of another place, then go we, and as the Scripture 
borroweth similitudes of worldly things, even so we again 
borrow similitudes or allegories of the Scripture, and apply 
Ifaem to our purposes ; which allegories are no sense of .. 
the Scripture, but free things besides the Scripture, and are no 
altogether in the liberty of the Spirit. Which allegories ^ripture. 
1 may not make at all the wild adventures ; but must 
keep me within the compass of the faith, and ever apply 
mine allegory to Christ, and unto the faith. Take an en- 
sample: thou hast the story of Peter, how he smote off 
Malchus's ear, and how Christ healed it again. There 
hast thou in the plain text great learning, great fruit, and 
great edifying, which I pass over because of tediousness. 
Then come I, when I preach of the law and the gospel, 
and borrow this ensample, to express the nature of the 
law, and of the gospel, and to paint it unto thee before 
thine eyes. And of Peter and his sword mak^ I the law, 
and of Christ the gospel ; saying. As Peter's sword cutteth 
off the ear, so doth the law. The law damneth, the law 
killeth, and mangle th the conscience. 

There is no ear so righteous that can abide the hearing 



U2 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[Tyicimlk* 



prove no- 
thing. 



ir Ihoa 
i' an not 
lirtjve the 
all para ry 
witb tin 
iiiwti icxt 
Ihpii juit 
fnlstf ttuc- 



of the law. There is no deed so good but thai tlie law 
damtietli it. But Christy tbat is to say the gospel, the pro- 
mise*; atid testament tliat God hath made in Christ, liealelb 
the ear an<l conscience which tlxe law hath hurt- The 
gospel Is life, mercy and forgiveness freely, and altogether 
an healing plaister. And ais Peter doth but hurt and 
make a wound where was none before, even so dotli the 
law. For when we think tliat we are holy and righteous, and 
full of good deeds ; if the law be preached aright, our righ- 
teoui^u^s and gooil deedi$ vanish away^ as smoke in the 
wind, and we am left damnable sinners only. And aji 
thou seest how that Christ healeth not till Peter had 
wounded, and as an healing plaister ht^lpetli not, till the 
corrosive hath troubled the wound ; even ao the gospel 
helpeth not, but when the law hath wounded the con- 
science , and brought the sinner into the knowledge of bi^ 
sin* This allegory proveth nothing, neitlier can do* For 
it is not the Scripture, but an ensample or a siTiulitude 
borrowed of the Scripture to declare a text, or a conclu- 
sion of the Scripture more expressly, and to root it and 
grave it in the heart. For a similitude, or an ensatnple, 
dotli print a thing much deeper in tlie wits o( a man, than 
dolh a plain »|)eak]ng, and leaving behind him as it were a 
sting to prick him forward, and to awake him withaL 
Moreover if I could not prove with an open text tliat 
which the allegory doth express, then wer« the allegory a 
thing to be jested at, and of no greater value than a tale 
of Robinhood, This allegory as touching his first part is 
proved by Paul in the iiird chapter of his Epistle to the 
Romans, where he sailh, The law can>?eth nTath. And 
in the viith chapter to the Romans, When the law or 
commandment came, sin revived, and I became dead. 
AihI in the iind Epistle to the Corinthians, in the tiiird 
chapter, the law is called the minister of death and dam- 
nation, Slc, And as concerning the second part, Paul 
saith to the Uomans in the vlh chapter, In that we are 
justified by faith we are at peace wiili God. And in tlie 



TT?rDAL«.J 



A CHRISTIAN MAN. 



343 



The Uteral 
sense pro- 
rcid the Al- 
legory* 



TJiry that 

jtwtify 

iheiDselres 



children of 



lid Epistle to Uie Coriiithiatis in the third. The gospel is 
called tlie fniiitstration of jusstifyitig and of the Spirit. 
And (Gal, iv-) The Spirit cometh by preaching of the faith 
Sic. Thus doth die literal sense prove the allegory, and 
bear it^ as the foundation bearctli tlie house. And because 
that allegories prove nothing, therefore are they to be used 
soberly and seldom^ and only where the text offerelh thee 
an allegory. 

And of this manner (as I above have done) doth Paul 
borrow a similitude^ a tigure or allegory of Genesis to 
express the nature of the law, and of tlie gospel : and hy 
Hagar and her son, declaretlj the property of the law, and by ibeir 
of her bond children^ which will be justified by deeds ; TJi'^^jjj'^* 
and by Sarah and her son declareth the property of the 
gospel, and of her free children which are justified by faith ; 
and how tlie children of the law which believe in their 
works persecute the children of the gospel which believe 
in the mercy and truth of God, and in the Testament of 
his son Jesus our Lord. And likewise do we borrow 
likenesses or allegories of the Scripture, as of Pharaoh 
and Herod, and of the scribes and pharisees, to express our 
miserable captivity and persecution under antichrist the pope. 
The greatest cause of which captivity and the decay of 
the faith, and this blindness wherein we now are, sprang ^^^ f^^j^ 
first of allegories. For Origen, and the doctors of his was lost 
time, drew all the Scripture unto allegories. Whose en- 
sample they that came after followed so long, till they at 
last forgot the order and process of the text, supposing 
that the Scripture senred but to feign allegories upon. In- 
somuch that twenty doctors expound one text twenty ways, 
as children make descant upon plain song. Then came 
our sophisters with their anagogical and chopological sense, 
and with an an tithe me of half an inch, out of w hich some 
of them draw a thread of nine days long. Yea, thou shalt 
find enough tliat will preach Christ, and prove whatsoever 
point of the faith that thou wilt, as well out of a fable of 
Ovidj or any other poet, as out of St. John's Goepel or 



through 
aUegorieS) 



Chopologi- 
cal BOphlB- 

ttira. 



344 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[TyNDALBi 



Poetry U 

lu good (U- 
TioUy OS 
Uie Scrip- 
ture to our 
ucboolmefii 

The literal 
sense kil- 

i(?pliUUrrs. 



Ttlft lottCT 
kitletti, is- 
cxpouadc<I> 



To lof e 

Ihe Imw is 
rigbteous- 



Paiirs EpisUes* Yea they are come unto such bliudness, 
that lliey not only say the literal sense profiteth not, but 
also that it h hurtful and noisome and killeth the soul- 
Which damnable doctrine they prove by a text of Paul, 
(£ Cor iiii) where he saith, The letter killetli, but ilie 
spirit giveth life, Lo, say they, the literal sense killeth 
and the spiritual sense giveth life. We must tliereforc, 
say tliey, seek out some chopologicul sense. 

Here learn what sophistry is, and how blind they are, 
that thou mayest abhor them, and spue them out of thy 
stomach for even Paul by the letter meaiieth Moses's 
law, which the process of the text following declaretb 
more bright than Uie sun. But it is not their guise to 
look on the order of any text; but as tliey find it in tlieir 
doctors^ so allege they it, and so understand it. Paul 
maketh a comparison between the law and die gospel, 
and calletli the law the letter, because it was but letters 
graven in two tables of cold stone* For the law doth but 
kill and damn the conscience, as long as titer e is no lust 
in tlie heart to do that which tlie lawconmiandeth. Con- 
trariwise, he calleth the gospel the administration of llie 
Spirit, and of righteousness, or justifying. For when 
Christ is preached, and the promises which God hath 
made in Christ are believed, the Spirit enteretli the heart, 
and looseth tlie heart, and giveth lust to do the law, and 
inaketli die law a lively thing in the heart. Now as soon 
as the heart lustetli to do the law, tlien are we righteous 
before God, and our sins forgiven* Nevertheless the law 
of the letter graved in stone^ and not in their hearts, was 
BO glorious, and Moses's face shone so bright, that the 
children of Israel could not behold his face for brightness. 
It was also given in tliunder and lightning and terrible 
signs ; so tliat they, for fear, came to Moses, and desired 
him that he would speak to them, and let God speak no 
more ; Lest we die (said they) if we hear him any more : 
as thou mayest see Exod, x%. Whereupon Paul maketh 
his comparison, saying: If the m in ist ration of death 



Tyndalb.] a christian MAN. 345 

through the letters figured in stones was glorious^ so that 
the children of Israel could not behold the face of Moses 
for the glory of his countenance ; why shall not the ad- 
ministration of the Spirit be glorious ? And again : If 
the administration of damnation be glorious, much more 
shall the administration of righteousness exceed in glory : 
that is, if the law that killelh sinners, and helpeth them 
not, be glorious ; then the gospel which pardoneth 
sinners, and giveth them power to be the sons of God, 
and to overcome sin, is much more glorious. And the 
text that goeth before is as clear. 

For the holy apostle Paul saith. Ye Corinthians are 
our epistle, which is understood and read of all men, in 
that ye are known how that ye are the epistle of Christ 
ministered by us, and written, not with ink, (as Moses's law) 
but with the Spirit of the living God ; not in tables of 
stone, (as the ten commandments) but in the fleshy tables 
of the heart: as who should say. We write not a dead law 
with ink, and in parchment, nor grave that which damned 
you in tables of stone ; but preach you that which bringeth 
the Spirit of life unto your breasts, which Spirit writeth 
and graveth the law of love in your hearts, and giveth you 
lust to do the will of God. And furthermore, saith he, 
Our ableness cometh of God, which hath made us able to 
minister the New Testament, not of the letter, (that is to 
say, not of the law) but of the Spirit : for the letter (diat 
is to say, the law) killeth ; but the Spirit giveth life ; (that 
is to say, the Spirit of God) which entereth your hearts 
when ye believe the glad tidings that are preached you in 
Christ ; quickeneth your hearts, and giveth you life and 
lust, and maketh you to do of love and of your own accord 
without compulsion, that which the law compelled you to 
do, and damned you, because ye could not do with love 
and lust, and naturally. Thus seest thou that the letter signi- 
fieth not the literal sense, and the spirit the spiritual sense. 
And Rom. ii. Paul useth tliis term Litera, for the law. 
And Rom. vii. where he setteth it so plain, that if the 



346 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[Tykualis, 



Tbc literal 
ritual 



What U to 
be ^^iiglii 
ID the 
Scripture 

■0(1 in tbe 

litpml 

Eiense. 



The story 
of Rruben. 



Swenr ibey 
bf their bo- 
no ur, tlien 
are they 
not ready 
to iuffer 
ih^mo for 



great wrath of God had not blinded tliem^ they could 
uever have stuuibled at it. 

God is a Spirit, and all his words are spirituaL His 
literal sense h spirituul, and all hh words are sptritiiaL 
When thou readest (Matt, i.) She shall bear a son^ and 
thou shalt call bis name Jesus ; for he shall save his 
people from their sins : this literal sense is spiritual and 
everlaiiting life unto as many as believe it. And tlie littoral 
sense of these words, (Malt, v.) Blessed are die merciful, 
for they shall have mercy ; are spiritual and life. Whereby 
they that are merciful may of right, by the truth and pro* 
mise of God, challetige mercy. And like is it of tliese 
words, (Malt, vi.) If you forgive other men tJieir sins, your 
heavenly Father shall forgive you yours. And so is it of 
all the promises of God. Finally, all God's words are spi- 
ritual, if diou have eyes of God to see the right meaning of 
the text, and where unto the Scripture pertaineth, and ttie 
final end and cause thereof. 

All the Scripture is either tlie promises and testament of 
God ill Christ, and stories pertaining thereunto to strength 
thy faith ; eidier the law, and stories pertaining thereto, to 
fear thee from evil doing* There is no story nor gest, seem it 
never so simple or so \ile unto the world, but that tlioti 
shall find therein spirit and life and edifying in tlie literal 
sense. For it is God's Scripture, written for thy learning 
and comfort. There is no clout or rag there that hatli not 
precious relics wrapt therein of faitli, hope, patience and 
long suffering, and of the tnUh of God, and also of his 
righteousness. Set before thee the story of Reuben which 
defiled his fatlier's bed. Mark what a cross God suffered 
to fall on the neck of his elect Jacob. Consider first the 
sbanie among the heathen, when as yet there was no more 
of the whole world widiin the testament of God, but he and 
hia household. I report me to our prelates which swear 
by their honour, whether it were a cross or no, Seest 
thou not how our w icked builders rage, because they see 
their buildings burn^ now they are tried by the fire of God's 



Tyndale*] 



A CHRISTIAN MAN. 



llrord ; and how they Btir up the whole world, to quench the 
Word of God, for fear of losing their hoQour ? then what 
business had he to pacify hU children I look what ado he 
had at the defiling of his daughter Dinah. And be Uioij 
sure that the brethren there were no more furious for the 

Kefiling of their sister, than tlie sons here for defiling of 
leir mother. Mark what followed Reuben, to fear other, 
tliat they shame not their fathers and mothers. He was 
cursed, and lost the kingdom, and also the pricstdoni, and 
his tribe or generation was ever few in number as it ap- 
peareth in the stories of tlie Bible. 

The adultery of David with Datlisheba is an ensample 

not to move ns to evil : but if (while we follow the way of 

righteousness) any chance drive us aside, that we despair 

^kot. For if we saw not such infirmities in God's elect, we, 

^^"Which are so weak and fall so oft, should utterly despair, 

and think that titKl had clean forsaken us. It is therefore 

^■ft sure, and an undoubted conclusion, whether we be holy 

^'txr unholy, we are all sinners. But the difference is, that 

God's sinners consent not to tlieir sin. They consent un- 

Pthe law ttiat is both holy and righteous, and mourn to 
ive their sin taken away. But the devil's sinners cou- 
nt unto their sin, and would have the law and hell taken 
my, aod are enemies unto tlie righteousness of God. 
Likewise in the homely gest of Noah, when lie was 
drtmk, and lay in his tent with his privy members open, 

tist thou great edifying in the literal sense ! Thou seest 
hat became of the cursed children of wicked Ham, which 
iw his father's privy members and jested thereof unto his 
brethren* Thou seest also what blessing fell on Shem and 
Japhet, which went backward and covered their father's 
ni embers and saw them not. And thirdly thou seest what 
infirmity accompanieth God's elect, be they never so holy^ 
which yet is not imputed unto them. For the faith and 

■trust they have iti God swalloweth up all iheir sins, 
f Notwithstanding, this text offers us an apt and an hand- 
some allegory or similitude to describe our wicked Ham, 



347 



The JiditU 
U:ry of Da- 
vid. 



Th« differ- 

iween 
ners* had 



Noak 



The pope is 
nkent'd to 
Hum. 




34B 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[TyxoAtfi 



They will 
to hcHTcn 
by ft way of 
tbdr QWn 
making. 



Antichrist, the pope, which many hundred years haUi done 
al! the shame tiiat heart can think unto the privy member 
of God ; iA hich is the word of promise, or the word of 
faith as Paul callelh it Roin* x* ; and the gospt- 1 and tes- 
tament of Christ, wherewith we are begotten ; as thou 
seest 1 Pet. i. and James i. i\nd as the cursed children 
of Ham grow into giants, so mighty and great that the 
children of Israel seemed but grasshoppers in respect of 
ihem ; so the cursed sons of our Ham, the pope, his car- 
dinab, bishops, abbots, monkii, and friars, are become 
tt]ight>' giants above all power and authority ; bo tliat the 
children of faith, in respect of them, are much less than 
grasshoppers. They heap mountain upon mountain, and 
will to heaven by their own strengtli, by a way of tlieir own 
making and not by the way Christ, Nevertlielatcr, 
those giants, for the wickedness and abominations which 
they had wrought, did God utterly destroy, part of theoi 
by tlie children of Lot, and part by the childi^n of Esau, 
and seven nations of them by the children of Israel, So 
no doubt shall he destroy these for like abominations, £ind 
that shortly. For their kingdom is but the kingdom of 
lies and falsehood, wliich must needs perish at the cona- 
ing of the truth of God^n word, as the night vanisheth away 
at the presence of day. The children of I^^rael slew nol 
those giants, but the power of God ; God's truth and pro- 
mises, as tliou mayest see in Deuteronomy, So it is not we 
tliat shall destroy tliose giants, as thon mayest see by Paul, 
(2 Thes* lu) speaking of our Ham Antichrist ; Whom the 
Lord shall destroy (saith he) w ith the spirit of his mouth ; 
that is, by the words of truth ; and by the brightness of Ms 
coming ; tliat is, by tlie preaching of his gospel. 



TUc use of 
iiiuiEliudei. 



An D as I have said of allegories, even so it is of worldly 
similitudes^ which we make either when we preachy 
either wheu we expound the Scripture, The simihtudes 
prove nothing, but are made to express more plainly that 
which is contained in the Scripture, and to lead thee into 



Tynpalr] a christian MAN. 349 

the spiritual understanding of the text. As the similitude 
of matrimony is taken to express the marriage that is be- 
tween Christ and our souls, and what exceeding mercy we 
have there, whereof all the Scriptures make mention. 
And the similitude of the members, how eveiy one of them 
caredi for other, is taken to make thee feel what it is to 
love thy neighbour as thyself. That preacher therefore a simili- 
that bringetb a naked similitude to prove that which is *"^%^'?**3 
contained in no text of Scripture, nor followeth of a text, ture, is a 
count a deceiver, a leader out of the way, and a false pro- ' f" ^^^^ 
phet, and beware of his philosophy and persuasions of prophet. 
man's wisdom, as Paul (i. Cor. ii.) saith : My words and p^ai 
my preaching were not with enticing words, and persua- preached 
sioDS of man's wisdom, but in showing of the Spirit and ly wisdom. 
power. That is, he preached not dreams, confirming them 
with similitudes ; but God's word confirming it with mi- 
racles and with working of the Spirit, the which made 
them feel every thing in their hearts. That your fiiith, 
saith he, should not stand in the wisdom of man; but in 
the power of God. For the reasons and similitudes of Similitndcs 
man's wisdom make no faith, but wavering and uncertain 'J*!;^'^^'** 
opinions only : one draweth me this way with his argu- wisdom 
ment, another that way, and of what principle thou provest fouh^bnt 
black, another proveth white : and so am I ever uncertain, wavering 
As if thou tell me of a thing done in a far land, and ano- only. 
ther tell me the contrary, I \^ot not what to believe. 
But faith is wrought by the power of God, that is, when God's word 
Gpd's word is preached, the Spirit entereth thine heart, g^t-e faith, 

and maketh thy soul feel it, and maketh thee so sure of it, ^'*»' ^°^,. 

, , . cannot lie. 

thatneither adversity, nor persecution, nor death, neither 

hell^ nor the powers of hell, neither yet all the pains of hell 

could once prevail against thee, or move thee from the 

sure rock of God's word, that thou shouldst not believe preached 

that which God hath sworn. not fables 

and false 
. And Peter (2 Pet. i.) saith. We followed not deceiv- similitudes, 

able fables, when we opened unto you the power and p",^n^«:D- 

coming of our Lord Jesus Christ ; but with our eyes, we ture. 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[Tyndale* 



School doc-' 
tripe. 



ure riogood 
argil jiienta 
Among: tUc 
sopUijiLers 



Siiw his majesty^ And i^g^iij we have (sattb he) a more 
sure word of prophecy, ^hereunto if ye take heed, as 
unto a light i^hiiiiiig in a dark place, ye do welJ. The 
word of prophecy was the old Testament which beiiretJt 
record unto Christ in every place, without which record 
the Apo^stles made neither siniilitudes iioi arguments of 
worldly wit» Hereof seest thou, tliat all tlie allegories, 
tfimilitudeH, |>enJuasions and arguments, which they bring 
without Scripture, to prove prayuig to saints, purgatory, 
ear cotifesj^ioii ; and that God will liear tliy pi-aycr more 
in one place than in anotlier ; and that it is more meritorious 
to eat fish, than flesh ; and that to disguise thyself and put 
on tliis or thatuianaer[of ]coat is more acceptable than to go 
as God hath made thee ; and that widowhood is better tliaa 
matrimony, and virgimty than widowhood ; and to prove 
the absumption of our lady, and tliat she was burn without 
original sin, yea, and with a kiss say some, are but faUe 
doctrine* 

Take an ensample how they prove that widowhood and 
virgiujly^xceed niairiniony. They bring this worldly simili* 
tude : he that taketh most pain for a man deseneth 
most, and to him a man is most bound ; so likewise must 
it be witli God, and so forth. Now the widow and virgin 
take more pain in resisting their lusts than the married wife, 
therefore is their state holier. First, I say, that in their 
own saphistr} , a similitude is the worst aod feeblest argu- 
ment tliat can be^ and proveth least, and soonest deceivcth* 
Though that one son do more service for his fatber than 
another, yet is the father free, and may with right reward 
them all alike* For though 1 had a thousand brethren, 
and did more than they all, yet do I not my duty. The 
fathers and mothers also care most for tlie least and weak- 
est, and them that can do least : yea, for the worst can; 
they most, and would spend, not their goods only, but also 
their blood, to bring them to the right way. And even so 
is it of the kingdom of Christ, as thou mayest well see in 
tlie similitude of the riotous son. (Luke xv.) More- 



Tyndalb.] a christian MAN. 3M 

over Paul saitb, (1 Cor. vii.) It is better to marry than 
to bum. For the person that bumeth cannot quietly serve 
God, inasmuch as his mind is drawn away^ and the thoughts 
of his heart occupied with wonderful and monstrous ima-^ 
ginations. He can neither see, nor hear, nor read, but 
that his wits are rapt, and he clean from himself. And 
again, saith he, circumcision is nothing, uncircumcision is 
nothing : but the keeping of the conmiandments is altogether. 
Look wherein thou canst best keep the commandments ; 
thither get thyself and therein abide ; whether thou be 
widow, wife, or maid, and then hast thou all with Grod. We must 
If we have infirmities that draw us from the laws of God, |^"^^"J ^ 
let us cure them with the remedies that God hath made« with the 
If thou bum, marry. For God hath promised thee no ^^Vod 
chastity, as long as thou mayest use the remedy that he jj^J^J^""" . 
hath ordained : no more than he hath promised to slake not tempt 
diine hunger without meat. ^^* 

How to ask of God more than he hath promised, 
Cometh of a false faith, and is plain idolatry : and to 
desire a miracle where there is natural remedy, is tempting 
of God. And of pain-taking thiswise understand. He 
that taketh pains, to keep the commandments of God, is 
sure thereby that he loveth God, and that he hath God's 
spirit in him. And the more pain a man taketh (I mean ^^"t 
patiently and without grudging) the more he loveth God, of God m. 
and the perfecter he is, and nearer unto that health which 
the souls of all Christian men long for, and the more purged 
from the infirmity and sin that remaineth in the flesh. But 
to look for any other reward or promotion in heaven or in 
Ae life to come, than that which God hath promised for 
Christ's sake ; and which Christ hath deserved for us with 
his pain taking ; is abominable in the sight of God. For 
Christ only hath purchased the reward ; and our pain taking, 
to keep the commandments, doth but purge the sin that 
remainedi in the flesh, and certify us that we are chosen 
and sealed with God's spirit unto the reward that Christ 
hath purchased for us. 



aGf# 



•rmt OUBDIBNiCS VOF 



[TVNDALK^ 



f. I luit once stflielawtiilg^f Doctors of Divinity, where 
the t^poMDt tlnrojoi^ die iame reason to prove that the 
wdow bad more merit lliail the virgin^ because shv haiJ 
greater paioi for aa mudi as she bad once proved the plea- 
aurea of matrimooy* JE^o n^o, Domine Doctor j s»id the 
reapondent For tboiq^ die virgiti have not proved, yet 
die imagined dwl die {deaaiire ia greater than it is indeed, 
anddierBfore la mora moved^ imd hath greater teniptatiou 
and greater pain. Are not:dieae disputers they that Paul 
afi^akedi of in die ndi diapte of the first Epktle to 
TinMby ? tiiat they are not content with the wholesome 
iitrorda'cf our Lmd Jeans Christy and doctrine of godliness ; 
and dier^Ebre know nodiing: but wa^te their brains 
aboat questiona and alrife Of woikU, whereof spring envy^ 
strife and railing of men with corrupt minds^ destitute of 
the traifa. 

As pettainh^ to our lad/s body, where it is, or where 
die bo^ of Elias; of Jolwdie Evangelist, and of many 
odier be, pertainetfa not to us to know. One thing ara 
we sure of, that diqr are where God bath laid them. If 
diey be in heaven, we have never the more iu Christ : if 
diey be not there, we have never tlie less. Our duty ts to 
prepare ourselves unto the commandments and to be 
thankful for that which is opened unto us, and not to search 
the unsearchable secrets of God. Of God's secrets can 
we know no more than he openeth unto us. If God shut, 
who shall open ? How then can natural reason come by 
the knowledge of that which God hath hid unto himself ? 

Yet let us see one of their reasons wherewith they prove 
it. The chief reason is this^ every man doth more for his 
mother, say they, than for other ; in like manner must 
Christ do for his mother, therefore hath she this pre-emi- 
nence^ that her body is in heaven. And yet Christ, in the 
xiith chap, of Matt, knoweth her not for his mother, but 
as farforth as she kept his Father's commandments. And 
Paul, in the iind Epistle to the Corinthians chap. v. know- 
eth not Christ himself fleshly, or after a worldly purposed 



Ti'NDALIiJ 



A CHRISTIAN MAR 



353 



Last of all^ God is free aud no further bouad than he 
bindeth bimself : if he have made her auy promise he is 
bound ; if not, then ia he not Fina%j if thou set this 
above rehear?jed chapter of Matthew before thee where Christ 
would not know his mother^ and the iind of John where 
he rebuked her, and the iiud of Luke where she lost him, 
and how negligent she was to leave him behind her at 
Jerusalem unawares^ and to go a day's journey ere she 
sought for him, thou mightest resolve many of their reasons 
which they make of tliis matter, and tliat she was not with- 
out original sin : read also Erasmus's Annotations in the 
said places. And as for me, 1 commit all such matters 
unto those idle bellies which have nought else to do than 
to move such questions, and give them free liberty to hold 
what they list, as long as it hurteth not the faith, whether 
it be so or no : exhorting yet with Paul all that will please 
God, and obtain that salvation that is in Christ, that they 
give no heed unto unnecessary and brawling disputations, 
and that they labour for the knowledge of those things 
without winch they cannot be saved. And remember that 
the sun was given us to guide ua in our way and works 
bodily. Now if tliou leave the natural use of the sun, and 
will look directly on him to see how bright he is, and suchlike 
curiosity, then will the sun blind thee. So was the Scripture 
given us to guide us in our way and works ghostly. The 
way is Christ, and the promises in him are our salvation, if we 
long for them. Now if we shall leave tiiat right use and turn 
ourselves unto vain questions, and to search the unsearchable 
secrets of God, then no doubt shall the Scripture blind us 
as it hath done our schoolmen and our subtle disputera. 



And as they are false prophets which prove with alle- 
gories, similitudes, and worldly reasons, that which b no 
where made mention of in the Scripture ; even so count 
ihem for false prophets which expound the Scriptures 
drawing them unto a worldly purpose clean contrary unto 
the cnsample, living, aud practising of Christ and of hi» 

VOL. n< 2 a 



354 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[IVHDAl^ft* 



In eic pound* 
lii^ of tbe 
Scripture 
we mii^t 
bave ft Ti*s- 
pect tinUi 
the I'ivitig 
nud pftic- 
tUitig of 
Climt, and 
of Ills apos- 
tles mid 
pToptieta. 



The Scrip- 
ture wna 
f^iven to 
lead UH 
nnto 
Cliristi 



teit^or 



aposlle^, and of all the holy prophists. For, saitb Peter^ 
(2 Pet* i.) No prophecy iu the Scripture hatli any pri- 
vate interpretation. For the Scripture cmiie not by tlie will 
of man ; but the holy men of God spake as they were 
moved by the Holy Ghost, No place of the Scripture may 
have a private exposition, that is, it may not be expounded 
after the vsrill of man, or after the will of the fle^h, or drawn 
unto a worldly purpose contrary unto the open texts, and 
the general articles of the faith, and the whole course of tlie 
Scripture, and contrar}' to the living and practii^ing of 
Christ and the apostles and holy prophets* For as they 
came not by the will of man, so may they not be drawn or 
expounded after the will of man : but as they came by the 
Holy Ghost, so most they be expounded and understood by 
tlie Holy Ghost* 7iie Scripture is that wherewith God 
draweth us unto him, aud not wherewith we should be led 
from him> The Scriptures spring out of God, and flow 
unto Christ, and were given to lead us to Christ. Tliou 
must tlierefore go along by the Scripture as by a line, until 
thou come at Chriat> which is the way's end and resting- 
place. If any man, therefore, use the Scripture to draw 
thee from Christ, and to nosel thee in any thing save in 
Christ, the same is a false prophet. And that Uiou mayest 
perceive what Peter meaneth, it folio wetli in the text» 
There were false prophets among the people (wbose pro- 
phesies were belly wisdom) as there shall he false teachers 
among you, which shall privily bring in damnable sects, 
(as thou seest how we are divided into monstrous sects or 
ordera of religion) even denying the Lord tliat hath 
bought them ; (for every one of them taketh on him to 
sell thee, for money, that which God in Christ promisetli 
tliee freely,) and many shall follow their damnable ways, 
by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of (aa thou 
seest how the way of truth is become heresvj seditious, or 
cause of insurrection, and breaking of tlie king's peace, 
and treason unto his highness). And through covelousne^s 
%vith feigned words nhall they make merchandise of you. 



TyUBALB*] 



A CHRISTIAN MAN. 



%m 



Covetousneas ia tlie coEClusion; for covetousness and 
axnbitJOD, that is to sny^ lucre and deiiire of honour, ia tbe 
final end of all fal^e prophets^ and of all false teachers. 
Look upon the pope's false doctrine, what is the end 
thereof^ and what seek they thereby? wherefore servetli 
purgatont, but to purge thy purse, and to poll tliee, and 
rob both thee and thy heirs of house and I audi, and of all 
thou bast, that they may be iti honour ? Serve not pardons 
for the same purpose ? whereto pertainelh praying to 
saints, but to ofier unto tJieir bellies ? wherefore ser^elli 
confesisiony but to sit in thy conscience and to make thee 
fear and tremble at whatsoever they dream, and that thou 
worship them as godsi ? and so forth, in all their traditions^ 
ceremonies, and conjurations, they serve not the Lord, 
but their bellies. And of their false expounding the 
Scripture, and drawing it contrary unto the ensample of 
Christ? and the apostles and holy prophets unto their dam* 
nable covetousness and filthy ambition, take an ensample : 
When Peter saith to Christ, (Matt. k\'u) Thou art the 
Son of the living God ; and Christ answered, Thou art 
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my congregation. 
By the rock interpret they Peter- And then cometh the 
pope, and will be Peter's successor, whether Peter will 
or will not ; yea, whether God will, or will not ; and though 
all the Scripture say Nay to any such succession, and faith, 
Lo I am the rock, the foundation, and head of Christ's 
church > Now saith all the Scripture, that the rock is 
Christ, the faith, and God's word. As Christ saith, 
(Matt, vii,) He that heareth my words and doth thereafter, 
is like a man that buildeth on a rock. For the house that 
is built on God's word will stand, though heaven should 
fall. And (John xv.) Christ is the vine, and we the 
branches ; so is Christ the rock, the stock and foundation 
whereon wc be built. And Paul (1 Cor. iii.) calleth 
Christ our foundation ; and all other, whether it be Peter 
or Paul, he calleth them servants to preach Christ, and to 
build US on him. If therefore the pope be Peter*s succes- 

2 A 2 



ne«i nod 
desire of 
honour IS 
tbe €tiU of 
all false 

And tlitit 
wLicb fji]HS 
prophets 
«eek. 

Purgatory. 

Fftrdons. 

■ninta. 
Confewiaa. 



At] exam- 
|j!c of fiilse 
eipouiid- 
Joj tlie 

Scripiuret- 



CbriHt, the 
faith r and 
Gwd'a word 
is the rock, 
ftud not the 
pope. 



3:j6 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[TVNOALK, 



Tlie nuilio* 
nty of 
Pet(*r*i 8UC- 



TliAt expo- 
sition b 
fn]s£ whkb 
is j^rainst 
ibe o|J(?n 
Scripture, 
or ag&lnbl 
tbe pmc* 
tisin|? of 
Cbha ftDd 
of bis 
apostles. 



sor, his duly is to preach Christ only, and other authority 
hath he none. And (£d %u) Paul marrieth us unto 
Christj and driv^tli us from all trust and confidence in man. 
And, (Eph, ii.) saith Paul, Ye are built ou the foun- 
dation of the apostles and prophets ; that b^ on the woitl 
which they preached ; Christ being, sailh he, the head 
comer stone, in >^hoin every building, coupled together, 
groweth up into an holy temple in the Lord, in whom also 
ye are built together and made an habitation for God in 
ihe Spirit. And Peter, in the iidof his first Epistle, buildeth 
us on Christ, contrary to the pope, vrhich buildeth on 
himself. Hell gates shall not prevail against it ; tlial is to 
say, against the congregation that is build upon Chrbt*3 
faith, and upon God's word. Now were tlie pope the 
rock, hell gates could not prevail against him. For the 
house could not stand if the rock and foundation M^hereon 
it is built did perish : but the contrary see we in our popesi. 
For hell gates have prevailed against them many hundred 
years, and have swallowed them up, if God's word be 
true, and the stories that are written of them ; yea^ or if 
it be true that we see with our eyes. I will give thee the 
keys of heaven, saith Christ, and not, I give. And (John 
xxth.) after the resurrection paid it, and gave the keys to 
them all indifferently. Whatsoever thou bindest on earth, 
it shall be bound in heaven | and whatsoever thou loosest 
on earth, it shall be loosed in heaven. Of this te?st makelh 
the pope what he will, and expoundeth it contrary to all 
the Scripture, coutrarj* lo Christ's practising, and tiie 
apostles, and all the prophets. Now tlie Scripture givetli 
record to himself, and ever expoundeth itself by another 
open text. If the pope then cannot bring for his exposition 
tlie practising of Christ or of die apostles and prophets, or 
an open text, then is his exposition false doctrine. Christ 
expoundeth himself, (Matt, xviii*) saying. If the brother 
sin against thee, rebuke him betwixt him and thee atone. 
If he hear thee, thou hast won thy brother: but if he hear 
thee not, then take with thee one or two, and so forth, as 



Tyxoalb.] 



A CHRISTIAN MAN. 



3^7 



Binding 
nnd loosing 
18 one 
power. 



it sUmdeth in the text. He concludeth, saying to the mall^ 
Whatsoever ye bind in earthy it shall be bound in heaven ; 
and whatsoever ye loose on earth, it shall be loosed in 
heaven. Where binding is but to rebuke them that sin, 
and loosing to forgive them that repent. And (John xx.) 
Whose sins ye forgive, they are forgiven ; and whose sins 
ye hold, they are holden. And Paul (1 Cor. v.) bindeth, 
and (2 Cor. ii.) looseth after the same manner. 

Also this binding and loosing is one power ; and as he 
bindeth, so looseth he : yea, and bindeth first ere he can 
loose. For who can loose that is not bound ? Now what- 
soever Peter bindeth, or his successor, (as he will be called 
and 18 not, but indeed the very successor of Satan) is not 
so to be understood, that Peter, or the pope hath power 
to command a man to be in deadly sin, or to be damned, 
or to go into hell, saying, Be thou in deadly sin, be thou 
damned, go thou to hell, go thou to purgatory. For that 
exposition is contrary to the everlasting Testament that 
Grod hath made unto us in Christ. He sent his Son Christ 
to loose us from sin, and damnation, and hell, and that to 
testify unto the world, sent he his disciples. (Acts i.) Paul 
abo hath no power to destroy, but to edify. (2 Cor. x. 
and xiii.) How can Christ give his disciples power against 
himself, and against his everlasting Testament ? Can he 
send them to preach salvation, and give them power to 
damn whom they lust ? What mercy and profit have we in 
Christ's death, and in his gospel, if the pope which passeth 
all men in wickedness, hath power to send whom he will 
to hell, and to damn whom he lusteth ? we had then no 
cause, to call him Jesus, that is to say, Saviour: but 
might of right call him destroyer. Wherefore, then this 
binding is to be understood as Christ interpreteth it in the What bind- 
places above rehearsed, and as the apostles practised it, et£™**"' 
and is nothing but to rebuke men of their sins, by preaching 
die law. A man must first sin against God's law, ere the 
pope can bind him : yea, and a man must first sin against 
God's law, ere he need to fear the pope's curse. For 



What 
Jesus 
ttignifirfch. 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[Tyndalh. 



cursbig and binding are both one, and nothing saving to 
rebuke a man of his sim. by God*s law. It folio weth 
also, then, that tJie loosing is of like manner^ arid is nothing 
but forgiving of sin to them that repent, through preaching 
of tiie promises which God hath made in Christ, in whom 
only we have all forgiveness of sins, as Christ interpreteth 
it, and as the apoiitles and prophets practised it. So is it 
a false power that the pope taketh on him, to loose God*a 
laws, as to give a man license to put away his wife to 
whom God hath bound him, and to bind them to chastity 
which God commandeth to marry ; that is to wit, tlieni 
that bum and cannot life chaste, h is also a false power 
to bind that which God^s word maketh free, making siti 
10 the creatures which God hath made for man'u use. 

The pope which so fast loose th and purgeth in purga- 
tory, cannot with all the loos in gs and purgations that he 
hath, either loose or purge our appetites, and lust and re- 
bellion that h in U5 against the law of God* And yet 
the purging of them is the right purgatory* If he cannol 
purge them that are alive, wherewith purgeth he them 
that are dead I The apostles knew no other ways to 
purge, but through preaching God*9 word, which word 
only is tliat that purgeth the heart, as thou mayest aee 
John XV. Ye are pure saith Christy through the word« 
Now the pope preacheth not to them whom they feign to 
He in purgatory, no more than he doth to us that aiie alive. 
How then purgeth he them ? The pope in kin to Hobin 
Goodfellow which sweepcth the house, washeth thedi&hes# 
and purgeth all by night. But when day cometh tliert 
is nothing found clean > 

Some man will »ay the pope bindeth them not, they 
bind themselves. 1 answer, he that bindeth himself to the 
had lever have his life and soul ruled by the 
pope's will than by the will of God, and by the pope i 
word, than by the word of Cod, is a fooL And he that 
had lever be bond than free is not wise. And he that will 
not abide in the freedom wherein Christ hath set tis, is 



TtKDALE.] 



V CHRISTIAN MAN. 



3&9 



aliio mad* And he that iiiaketli deadly sin where none is, 
and seeketh causes of haired between him and God^ is not 
in his right wits* Furthennore, no man can bind him- 
aelf further than he haOi power over himself He that 
is under the power of another man, cannot bind himself 
without license, as son, daughter, wife, servant, and 
subject. Neither canst thou give God ihat which is not 
in thy power* Chastity canst thou not give further than 
God lendeth it thee : if thou cannot live chaste, thou art 
bound to marry or to be diimned. Last of all, for what 
purpose thou bindest thyself must be seen* If thou do 
it to obtain thereby that which Christ hath purchased for 
thee freely, so art thou an infidel, and hast no part witli 
Christy and so forth. If thou wilt see more of this matter 
look in Deuteronomy^ and there shalt thou find it more 
largely entreated* 

Take anodier ensample of tlieir false expounding the 
Scripture. Christ saith, (Matt* %xiii*) The scribes and 
the pharisees sit on Moses' seat ; whatsoever they bid you 
observe, that observe and do j but after their works do 
not. Iai, say our sophisters or hypocrites, live we never 
Sf» abominably, yet is our authority never the less. Do 
as we leach, therefore, (say they) and not as we do* And 
yet Christ saith they sit on Moses' seat ; that is as long as 
they teach Moses, do as they teach * For the law of 
Moiies is the law of God, But for their own traditions 
and false doctrine Christ rebuked them, and disobeyed 
them, and taught other to beware of their leaven. So if 
our pharisees sit on Christ's seat and preach him. Me 
ought to hear them ; but when they sit on their own seat, 
tlien ought we to beware as well of their pestilent doctrine 
as of their abominable living. 

likewise where they iind mention made of a sword, they 
turn it uiilo the pope's power. The disciples said imto 
Christ, (Luke xxii.) Lo, here be two swords* And Christ 
answered two is enough. Lo, say they, the pope 
hath two swords, the spiritual sword and the temporal 



Of our- 
Aelve^ we 
can per- 
form no- 
thing ftjr- 
thcr than 
God wiU 
give Ui 
power. 



Anollier 
example. 



To sit oil 
Christ'^ 
sent b to 
preacU aa4 
con ft as 
Chfbt. 



^8im 



Christ re- 
buketli de- 
sire of pre- 
eminence 
in his disci- 
ples, but 
the pope 
chaJlengetfa 
it above all 
men as his 
own inheri- 
tance. 




TBB OlOmiENCE OF 



And therefore is it lai^rftil for bim to fi{^ aad 
make war. 

Christ a little before he went to his passion, asked fait 
disciples, saying. When I sent yon out without all piiiTi- 
sion, lacked ye any thing? and &ey said Nay. And^fae 
«nswered> But now let him that hftdi a wallet tak^it'Mtk 
him, and he diat hath a scrip likewise, and' let hiin dwt 
•hath never a sword, sell his coat and hay^mi&zm iili» 
should say, it shall go o&erwise now than Itei. Hham.^ 
^oit forth iniaath of my word, and m^ FaAer^s pfoaiae% 
and it fed you and made provision for you, «ld was ^foiir 
sword and shield, and defender ; but now it shaH go fis 
thou readest Zechariah xiii. I will «mit^die thqplieid,'^Mii 
tibe riieep of Ae flock shall be scattered. Now shaff #^ 
Fadier leave me in the hands of the wicked; md |«jda& 
shall be forsaken and destitute of faith, and shril triiat^iiii 
yourselves, and in your own provinion^ and in yowt own 
defence. Christ gave no commandment, but pfopheaiei. 
idiait should happoi. And they, because Ikey undeniiood 
him Jio^ answered, H&e are two swords. A»d Chrsbt<to 
make an end of such babbling) answered. Two is e&oiigfe 
For if he had commanded every man to buy a sword, how 
had two been enough ? also if two were enough, and per- 
tained to the pope only, why are they all commanded to 
buy every man a sword ? By the sword, therefore, Christ 
prophesied that they should be left unto their own defence. 
And two swords were enough^ yea, never-a-one had been 
enough. For if every one of them had had ten swords they 
would have fled ere midnight. 

In the same chapter of Luke^ not twelve lines from the 
foresaid text, the disciples, even at the last supper, 
asked who should he the greatest. And Christ rebuked 
them, and said it was an heathenish thing, and there 
should be no such thing among them, but that the 
greatest should be as the smallest, and that to be great 
was to do service as Christ did. But this text because 
it is brighter than the sun, that they can make no so- 



then. 



Tvndale] a christian MAN. 361 

phistry of it, therefore will they not hear it, nor let other 
know it. 

Forasmuch now as thou partly seest the falsehood of 
our prelates, how all their study is to deceive us and to 
keep us in darkness, to sit as gods in our consciences, and 
handle us at their pleasure, and to lead us whether they 
lust ; therefore I read thee, get thee to God's word, and 
thereby try all doctrine, and against that receive nothing. 
Neither any exposition contrary unto the open texts, neither 
contrary to the general articles of the faith, neither con- 
trary to the living and practising of Christ and his apostles. 
And when they cry. Fathers, fathers, remember that it were Fathers, fa- 
the fathers that blinded and robbed the whole world, and 
brought us into this captivity, wherein these enforce to 
keep us still. Furthermore, as they of the old time are 
fathers to us, so shall these foul monsters be fathers to 
them that come after us ; and the hypocrites that follow us 
will cry of these and of their doings. Fathers, fathers, as 
these cry Fatliers, fathers, of them that are past. And as we 
feel our Fathers, so did they that are past feel their fathers : 
neither were there in the world any other fathers than such 
as we both see and feel this many hundred years ; as their 
decrees bear record, and the stories and chronicles well tes- 
tify. If God's word appeared any where, they agreed all 
against it. When they had brought that asleep, then 
strove they one with another about their own traditions, 
and one pope condemned anothers' decrees, and were 
sometimes two, yea, three popes at once. And one bishop 
went to law with another, and one cursed another for their 
own fantasies, and such things as they had falsely gotten. 
And the greatest saints are they that most defended the li- 
berties of the church ; (as they call it) which they falsely got 
with blinding kings ; neither bad the world any rest this 
many hundred years, for reforming of friars and monks 
and ceasing of schisms that were among our clergy. And 
as for tlie holy doctors, as Augustine, Jerome, Cyprian, 



m2 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[Tyndalk. 



miracles* 



Tlia wo- 
mnn of 

waa M ao- 
Jcmn mira- 



Thf^iimiour 
of the spi- 
ritualty. 



Tlic iir- 
tnoiir of n 
CbrUliim 
man m 

God'ii word 
mid hXih, 



Cliriiiostoinu^, aiid Bede, will Ihej not hear* If ihe) 
wrote any thing negligently, (as they were men) that draw 
they clean contrary to their meaning, and thereof triumph 
they. Those doctors knew of none authority that one 
hiifhop should have above anotlier, neither thought or once 
dreamed that ever any such should be, or of any such 
whispering or of pardons, or scouring of purgatory, as 
they have feigned. 

And when they cry, Miracles, miracles, remember that 
God hatli made an everlasdng testament with us in Christ '» 
blood, against which we may receive no miracles ; no, neither 
the preaching of Paul himself if he came again, by his 
own teaching to the Galatians, neiUier yet the preaching of 
the angels of heaven. Wherefore either they are no mi- 
racles but they have feigned them, {m is the miracle that 
St. Peter hallowed Westniiuster) or else if there be miracles 
that contirm doctrine contrary to God^s word, then are they 
done of the devil, (as the maid of Ipswich and of Kent) to 
prove us whether we will cleave fast to God*8 w^ord, and 
to deceive them that have no love to the truth of God's 
word, nor lust to walk in his laws. 

And tbrasmuch as they to deceive withal arm themselves 
ag£Un»t them with arguments and persuasions of fleshly 
wisdom ; with worldly similitudes ; with shadows j with false 
allegories ; with false expositions of the Scripture, contrary 
imto tlie hvhig and practising of Christ and the apostles; 
%viLh lies and false miracle ; with false names ; dumb cere^ 
monies ; with disguising of hypocrisy ; with the authorities 
of the fathers ; and last of all with the violence of the tern- 
ptiral sword: therefore do thou contrariwise arm thyself to 
defend thee withal, as Paul teacheth in the last chapter of 
the Ephesians, Gird ou diee tlie sword of the Spirit, which 
is God's word, and take to thee' tlie shield of faith : which is 
not to believe a tale of Robin Hood, or Ge^tus Romano- 
rum, or of the Chronicles, but to believe God*s word that 
lasteth ever. 

And when the pope with his falsehood challengeth teni- 



Tyndale.] a christian MAN. 363 

poral authority above king and emperor, set before thee 
the xxvth. chap, of St. Matt, where Christ command- 
eth Peter to put up his sword. And set before thee 
Paul iind. Cor. xth. where he saith the weapons of our 
war are not carnal things, but mighty in God to bring all 
understanding in captivity under the obedience of Christ ; 
that is, the weapons are God's word and doctrine, and not 
swords of iron and steel, and set before thee the doctrine 
of Christ and of his apostles and their practice. 

And when the pope challengeth authority over his fellow 
bishops, and over all the congregation of Christ by suc- 
cession of Peter, set before thee the first of the Acts where 
Peter for all his authority put no man in the room of 
Judas ; but all the apostles chose two indifferently, and 
cast lots, desiring God to temper them that the lot might 
fall on the most able. And (Acts viii.) the apostles sent 
Peter, and in the xith. call him to reckoning, and to give 
accounts of that he hath done. 

And when the pope's law commandeth, saying, though 
that the pope live never so wickedly and draw widi him 
through his evil ensample innumerable thousands into hell, 
yet see that no man presume to rebuke him, for he is head 
over all, and no man over him, set before thee Ga- 
latians iid. where Paul rebuketh Peter openly. And see 
how both to the Corinthians, and also to the Galatians, he 
will have no superior but God's word, and he that could q^^, ^^ 
.teach better by God's word. And because when he re- above 
hearsed his preaching and his doings unto the high apostles, jUdgment*. 
they could improve nothing, therefore will he be equal 
with the best. 

And when the friars say, they do more than their duty, p^^^, j^ 
when they preach, and more than they are bound to : To not bound 
say our service are we bound (say they) and that is our ^^ 
duty, and to preach is more than we are bound to. Set 
thou before thee how that Christ's blood-shedding hath 
bound us to love one another with all our might, and to do 
the uttermost of our power one to another. And Paul 



SG4 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[TvNDAtX. 



How God 

oufbt Co be 



saith, (I Cor, ix,) Woe be uiUo me, if I preach not : yea, 
woe is unto him that hath wherewith to help his neighbour 
and to make him better and do it not. If they think it 
more than their duty to preach Christ unto you, then tliey 
think it more than their duty to pray that he should come 
to the knowledge of Christ* And therefore it is no marvel 
though they take so great labour : yea, and so great wages 
also to keep you still in darkness. 

And when diey cry furiously, Hold the heretics unto 
the wall, and if they will not revoke, bum them without 
any more ado i reason not with them, it h an article con- 
demned by the fathers ; set thou before thee the saying 
of Peter: (1 Pet, iii,) To all that ask you, be ready to 
give an answer of the hope that is in you, and that with 
meekness. The fathers of the Je^s and the bishops, 
which had as great authority over them as ours have over 
us, condemned Chriit and his doctrine. If it be enough 
to say the fathers have condemned it, then are the Jews 
to be hoi den excused ; yea, they are yet in the right way, 
and we in tlie false ; hut and if the Jews be bound to 
look in the Scripture and to see whether their fathers 
have done right or wrong, then are we likewise bound to 
look in the Scripture whether our fathers have done right 
or wrong, and ought to believe nothing without a reason 
of the Scripture, and authority of God's w^ord* 

And of this manner defend thyself against all manner [of] 
wickedness of our spirits, armed always with God's word 
and with a strong and a steadfast faith thereunto. With- 
out God ^s word do nothing. And to his w^ord add notliing, 
neither pull any thing tlierefromj as Moses every where 
teacheth thee. Serve God in the Spirit, and thy 
neighbour with all outward service* Serve God as 
he hath appointed thee, and not with thy good intent 
and good zeaL Remember Saul was cast away of 
God for ever, for his good intents God requireth 
ot»edience unto his word, and ahhorreth aH good intents 
and good zeals which are without God*s word, for they 



TvNDALE.] A CHRISTIAN MAN. 365 

are nothing else than plain idolatry and worshipping of 
false Gods. 

And remember that Christ is the end of all things. In Christ 

_- , . . , , 1 . b rest of 

He only is our restmg place, and he is our peace, conscience 
(Eph. chap, ii.) For as there is no salvation in any other ®°'y* 
name, so is there no peace in any other name. Thou 
shalt never have rest in thy soul, neither shall the worm of 
conscience ever cease to gnaw thine heart, till thou come 
at Christ : till thou hear the glad tidings, how that God 
for his sake hath forgiven thee all freely. If thou trust in 
thy works there is no rest. Thou shalt think, I have not 
done enough. Have I done it with so great love as I 
should do ? was I so glad in doing as I would be to re- 
ceive help at my need ? I have left this or that undone, and 
such like. If thou trust in confession, then shalt thou 
think. Have I told all? have I told all the circum- 
stances ? Did I repent enough ? had I as great sorrow in 
my repentance for my sins as I had pleasure in doing them ? 
Likewise in our holy pardons and pilgrimages, gettest thou 
no rest. For thou s^est that the very gods themselves 
which sell their pardon so good, cheap, or somewhiles 
give them freely for glory sake, trust not therein them- 
selves. They build colleges, and make perpetuities to be 
prayed for for ever, and lade the lips of their headmen, 
or chaplains with so many masses, and dirges, and so long 
service, that I have known some that have bid the devil 
take their founders' souls, for very impatience and weari- * 

ness of so painful labour. 

As pertaining to good deeds therefore, do the best Do good 
thou canst, and desire God to give strength to do better traVin" 
daily ; but in Christ put thy trust, and in the pardon Christ. 
and promises that God hath made thee for his sake, and 
on that rock build thine house and there dwell. For there 
only shalt thou be sure from all storms and tempests, and 
from all wily assaults of our wicked spirits which study with 
aU falsehood to undermine us. And the God of all mercy 
give thee grace so to do, unto whom be glory for ever. Amen. 



3GG 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[^Tyndals. 



A COMPENDIOUS REHEARSAL OF THAT WHICH 
GOETH BEFORE. 



Ood*f word 
it Che nile 
ofcbildrra, 

wres, and 



To ]ll(!«S|! 

God, ia U) 

and lo lore 

bis com> 

itiand- 

tucntL 



¥ HAVE described unto you the obedience of children^ 
servants^ wives, and subjects. These four orders are of 
God's making, and the rules thereof are God's word. 
He that keepeth them shall be blessed : yea, is blessed 
already, and he that breaketh them shall be cursed* if 
any person of impatience or of a stubborn and rebellious 
mind, withdraw htm self from any of diese, and get him to 
any other order, let him not think thereby to avoid the 
vengeance of God in obeying rules and traditions of man*s 
imagination. If tliou pollest tliine head^in the worship of 
tliy father^ and break est his commandments^ shouldest thou 
so escape ? or if thou paint est thy Master^s image on a wall 
and stickest up a candle before it, shouldest tliou therewith 
make satisfaction for the breaking of his commandments? 
Or if thou we ares t a blue coat in the worship of the king 
and break est his laws shouldest diou so go quit ? Let a man's 
wife make herself a sister of tlie charterhousei and answer 
her husband when he biddeth her hold her peace, My 
brethren keep silence for me, and see whether she shall so 
escape. And be thou sure God is more jealous over his 
commandments than man is over his, or than any man is 
over his wife. 

Because we be blind, God hath appointed in the Scrip- 
ture bow we should serve him and please him. As per- 
taining unto his own person he is abundantly pleased when 
we believe his promises and Holy Testament which he 
hatli made unto us in Clirist, and for the mercy which he 
there shewed us, love his commandments. All bodily 
service must be done to man in God's stead. We must 
give obedience, honour, toll, tribute, custom, and rent 
unto whom tliey belong* Then if thou have ought more 
to bestow, give unto the poor which are left here in Christ's 



4 




Tyndai*e.1 



A CHRISTIAN MAN, 



nnr 



Btead, that we shew mercy on them. If we keep the com- 
ni^iiidmenls of love, then are we sure that we fulfil the law 
in tlie sigtit of God^ and that our blessing shall he ever- 
lasting life* No%v when we obey patiently, and without 
grudging, evil princes that oppress us, and persecute us^ 
and be kind and merciful to them that are merciless to us, 
and do the worst they can to us, and so take all fortune 
patiently, and kias whaUoever cross God layeth on our 
backsj then are we sure that we keep the commandments 
of love, 

I declared that God hath taken all vengeance into his 
own hands, and will avenge all un right himself: either by 
the powers or offices which are apjjointed thereto, or else, 
if they be negligent, he will send his curses upon the 
transgressors, and destroy them with his secret judgments. 
1 sliewed also that whosoever avengeth himself is damned 
iu the detd doing , and falleth into the hands of the tem- 
poral sword, because he taketh the office of God upon him 
and rohbeth God of his most high honour, in tJiat he will 
not patiently abide his judgment, J shewed you of the 
authority of princes, how they are in God*3 stead, and how 
they may not be resisted, do they never so evil, they must 
be reserved unto the wrath of God, Neverthelater, if 
they command to do evil we must then disobey and say. 
We are otherwise commanded of God : but not to rise 
against them. They will kill us then, sayest thou. There- 
fore, I say, is a christian called, to suffer even the bitter 
death for his hope^s sake, and because he will do no evil. 
I shewed also that the kings and rulei*s (be they never so 
evil) are yet a great gift of the goodness of God, and de^ 
fend us from a thousand things that we see not. 

1 proved also that all men without exception are under 
the tempc>ral sword, whatsoever names tlicy give themselves* 
Because the priest is chosen out of the laymen, to teach 
this obedience, is that a lawful cause for him to disobey ? 
Because he preacheth that the layman should not steal, is 
it tlierefore lawful for him to steal unpunished ? Because 



He Umt 

will nVL'nge 
robbeth 
God of biJ 
lionouf. 



How eTil 

Hoever tbc 
kiDg i«, 
yet ia be 
unto thee a 

of God. 



aes 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[Tyndai-k, 



hiilh A law 
that uoDe 
of liU 
AplrtLs tiiny 



thou teachest me that I may not kill^ or if I do, the king 
must kill me again^ b it therefore lawful for thee to kill 
and go free ? either whether is it rather mete that thou 
which art my guide to teach me the right way shouldst 
walk therein before me ? The piiesits of the old law with 
tfieir high bishop Aaron, and all his successors^ though 
they were anointed by God's commandment, and appointed 
to serve God in his temple, and exempt from all offices, 
and maiistering of worldly matters, w^ere yet nevertheless 
under the temporal sword, if they brake the laws, Christ 
saith to Peter, All that take the sword shall perish by the 
sword. Here is none exception, Paul saith, All sotils 
must obey. Here is none exception. Paul himself is 
here not exempt. God aaith, (Gen. ix.) Whosoever 
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed 
again* Here is none exception. 

Moreover Christ became poor to make other men rich, 
nnd bound to make other free. He left also with hi!» 
disciples the law of love. Now love secketh not her own 
prolit, but her neighbour's : love seeketh not her own 
freedom, but becometii surety and bond to make her 
neighbour free. Damned, therefore, are the spiritualty 
by all the laws of God, which through falsehood and dis- 
guised hypocrisy have sought so great profit, so great 
riches, so great authority, and so great liberties, and htt%*e 
so beggared the lay, and so brought ihem in subjection 
and bondage, and so despised them, that they have set up 
franchises in all towns and viilages, for whosoever robbelh, 
murdereth or slayeth them, and even for traitors unto the 
king's person also. 

I proved also that no king hath power to grant them 
such liberty ; but are as well damned for their giving, as 
they for their false purchasing. For as God giveth the 
father power over 'his children, even so giveth he him a 
commandment to execute it, and not to suffer them to do 
wickedly unpunished, but unto his damnation, as thou mayest 
mse by Eh, the high priest, &c. And as the master hath 



Ttndalb.] a christian MAN. 369 

authority over his servants, even so hath he a commandment 
to govern them. And as the husband is head over his wife, 
even so hath he commandment to rule her appetites, and is 
damned, if he suffer her to be an whore and a mis-liver, 
or submit himself to her, and make her his head. And The king U 
even in like manner as God maketh the king head over his ^ant to ex- 
realm, even so giveth he him commandment to execute ®*^"^ ^^® • 
the laws upon all men indifferently. For the law is God's, God. 
and not the king's. The king is but a servant, to ex- 
ecute the law of God, and not to rule after his own imagi- 
nation. 

I showed also that the law and the king are to be 
feared, as things that were given in fire, and in thunder, 
and lightning, and terrible signs. I showed the cause why 
rulers are evil, and by what means we might obtain better. 
I showed also how wholesome those bitter medicines evil 
princes are to right Christian men. 

I declared how they which God hath made governors in 
the world ought to rule, if they be Christian. They 
ought to remember that they are heads and arms, to de- 
fend the body, to minister peace, health, and wealth, and 
even to save the body ; and that they have received their 
oflSices of God, to minister and to do service unto their 
brethren : king, subject, master, servant, . are names in the 
world ; but not in Christ. In Christ we are all ope, and 
even brethren. No man is his own, but we are all 
Christ's servants, bought with Christ's blood. Therefore 
ought no man to seek himself or his own profit ; bu 
Christ and his will. In Christ no man ruleth as a king 
his subjects, or a master his servants ; but serveth as one 
hand doth to another, and as the hands do unto the feet, 
and the feet to the hands, as thou seest 1 Cor. xii. We 
also serve not as servants unto masters ; but as they which 
are bought with Christ's blood serve Christ himself. We 
be here all servants unto Christ. For whatsoever we do 
one to another in Christ's name, that do we unto Christ, 
and the reward of that shall we receive of Christ. The 

VOL. 11. 2 B 



370 



THE OBEDlENtE OF 



[TV7<0ALIt^, 



How far n 
1iis com- 



Note. 



king caunteth his commons Cbrist himself, and therefore 
doth them service wiUingly; seeking no moix' of tijeiii ihmt 
is suflicient to maintain peace and unity, and to defeiHi die 
realm. And they obey again willingly and lovingly » as 
unto Christ, And of Christ every man seeketh his re- 
ward* 

I warned the judges that they take not an ensample 
how to minister their offices of our spiritualty, w hich are 
ibuuglit and sold to do llie will of Satan ; but of the 
Scripture^ whence they have iheir iiutliovily, I^t that 
which is secret abide secret till God open it, which is tlie 
J udge of secrets. For it is more than a cruel Unng to 
break up into a man's hearty and to compel him to put 
either soul or body in jeopardy, or to shame himself. If 
Peter, that great pillar, for fear of death, forsook his 
Master, ought we not to spare weak consciences ? 

I declared how the king ought to rid his realm from the 
wily tyranny of the hypocrites, and to bring the hypocrites 
11 rider his taws : yea, and how he ought to be learned, mid 
to hear, and to look upon the causes himself^ which he 
will punish ; and not to believe the hypocrites, atid to 
give them his sword to kill whom they w ilL 

The king ought to count what he hatli spent in the 
pope's quarrel since he was king* llic first voyage 
cost upon fourteen hundred tliousand pounds. Reckon 
since what hath been spent by sea and land between us 
and Frenchmen, and Scots, and then in triumphs, and in 
embassies, and w hat hatli been sent out of the realm se- 
cretly, and all to maintain our holy father, and 1 doubl 
not but that will sMrmount the sum of forty or fifty hundred 
thou:iand pounds. For we had no cause to spend one 
penny but for our holy father. The king therefore ought 
to make ihem pay this money every farthing, and set it out 
of their mitres, crosses^ shrines, and all manner [of] trea- 
sure of the churchy and pay it to his commons again : 
not that only which the cardinal and his bisltops com- 
pelled the commons to lend, and made them swear with 



.Ttwdalb.] a christian MAN. 371 

such an ensample of tyranny as was never before thought 
on ; but also all that he hath gathered of them. Or else 
by the consent of the commons^ to keep it in store for the 
defence of the realm. Yea^ the king ought to look in 
the chronicles, what the popes have done to kings in time 
past, and make them restore it also ; and ought to take 
away from them their lands which they have gotten widi 
their false prayers, and restore it unto the right heirs again j^ 
or with consent and advisement turn them unto the main- 
taitiing of the poor, and bringing up^f youth virtuously, 
and to maintain necessary officers and ministers for to 
defend the commonwealth. 

If he will not do it, then ought the commons to take 
patience, and to take it for God's scourge, and to think 
diat God hath blinded the king for their sins' sake, and 
commit their cause to God : and then shall God make a 
a scourge for them, and drive them out of hb temple, 
afler his wonderful judgment. 

On the other side, 1 have also uttered the wickedness 
of the spiritualty, the falsehood of the bishops, and 
juggling of the pope, and how they have disguised them- 
selves, borrowing some of their pomp of the Jews, and 
some of the Gentiles, and have with subtle wiles turned 
die obedience that should be given to God's ordinance unto 
fliemselves. And how they have put out God's Testament 
and God's truth, and set up their own traditions and lies, 
m which they have taught the people to believe, and thereby 
sit in their consciences as God ; and have by that means 
robbed the world of lands and goods, of peace and unity, 
and <rf all temporal authority, and have brought the people 
mto the ignorance of God, and have heaped the wrath of 
God upon all realms ; and namely, upon the kings : 
whom Aey have robbed, (I speak not of worldly things 
only) but even of their very natural wits. They make 
diem believe that they are most Christian, when they live 
most abominably ; and will suffer no man in their realms 

2 B 2 



S7^ ■! 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[Tir?(DAi*is- 



Coafes- 



Tlic lit an I- 
fold enor* 

wUkb 
lUt'ir nuri- 
culJir eoR- 
feiMtm did 
breed. 




Tlic jiope 
fltid hh 
fduplaitift 
w*re the 
roualaimt 
of aW eTils 
iu tpiHiual 
regiment 
or tem* 
I>oraJ. 



that believe til on Christ ; and ihat they arc defenders of 
the faith, v^hen tliey hum the gospel and protnis^es of God , 
out of which all faith apringeth* 

I allowed how they have ministered Chriijt, king and 
emperor out of their rooms j and how they have made 
them a several kingdom^ which they got at tlie first ui 
deceiving of princes, and now pervert die whole Scrip- 
ture, to prove that they have such authority of God. 
And lest the laymen should see how fulsely they allege 
the places of the Scripture, is the greatest cause of this* 
iiersecution* 

Tliey have feigned confession for the same purpose to 
stablish their kingdom withal. All secrets know they 
thereby. The bishop knoweth the confession of whom 
he lustelh throughout all his diocese. Yea, and his chan- 
cellor cotumandeth the ghostly fatlier to deliver it wiitten. 
The pope, his cardinals and bishops ^ know the confession 
of the emperor^ kings, and of all lords : and by confes- 
sion they know all their captives* If any believe in Christ, 
by confession they know him. Shrive thyself where thou 
wilt, whether at Sion, Charterhouse, or at the observant^s, 
thy confession is known well enoughs And thou, if thou 
believe in Christ, art waited upon. Wonderful are the 
things that thereby are wrought* The wife is feared, and 
compelled to utter not her own only, but also the secrets 
of her husband, and the servant the secrets of his master. 
Besides tliat through confession they quench the faith of 
all the promises of God, and take away the effect and 
virtue of all the sacraments of Christ, 

They have also corrupted the saints' lives witli lies aiHJ 
feigned niiracks, and have put many things out of the 
j^ntence or great curse, as raising of rent and fines, and 
hiring men out of tlieir houses, and whatsoever wicked- 
ness they themselves do ; and have put a great part of ilie 
stories and chronicles out of the way lest their falsehmKl 
should be seen. For there is no mischiefs or disorder^ 
wliether it be in the temporal regiment, or else in tlie 




^Tyndale.] 



A CIIRISTUN MAN. 



375 



^^HD6! 



Spiritual, whereof they are not the chief causses, and even 
the very fountain and springs^ and aa we saj, the well- 
ad ; so that it is impossible to preach against mischief 
except thou begin at tltem, or to set any reformation in 
tlie world except thou reform them first* Now arc they 
indurate and tough as Pharaoh, and will not bow unto 
any right way or order. And therefore persecute they 
God's word and the preachers thereof ; and on the other 
side lie await unto all princes, and stir up all mischief in 
the world; and send them to war^ and occupy their minds 
therewith, or with other voluptuousness, lest ihey should 
have leisure to hear the word of God, and to set an order 
in their realms. 

By them is all things ministered, and by them are ail 

kings ruled : yea, in every king's conscience sit they ere 

he be king, and persuade every king what they lust, and 

^make them both to believe what they will, and to do what 

iey will. Neither can any king or any realm have rest for 

their businesses. Behold king Henry theVth, whom they 

ent out for such a purpose as they sent out our king that 

:>w is. See how the realm is inhabited, Ask where the 

"goodly towns and their walls, and the people that was 

wont to be in them are become, and where the blood 

royal of the realm is become also 1 Turn thine eyes 

whittier thou wilt, and thou shalt see nothing prosperous 

^_but their subtle polling. With that it is flowing water: 

^Kea, and ] trust it will be shortly a full sea. 

^B In all their doings, tliougli tliey pretend outwardly the 

^■lionour of God or a commonwealth, their intent and 

secret counsel is only to bring all under their power, and 

to take out of the way whosoever lettelh them, or is too 

mighty for them. As when they send the princes to 

Jerusalem, to conquer the holy land, and to fight against 

Hifae Turks, whatsoever ihey pretend outwardly, their 

^^ecret intent is, while the princes there conquer them more 

bishoprics, to conquer their lands in the mean season with 

ihiiir false hypocrisy, and to bring all under them ; which 



^»3€ni 



Uadcf Ml 
outwiird 
pre tr nee of 
God'fi ho- 
nour, thtt 

clergy pro- 
cured tlicir 
awn dig- 
nity. 




374 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[TVNDALE. 



tlioii majest easily p^irciave by that they will not let us 
know the faith of Christ, ^iid wheu they are once on 
higlii then are llicy tyrants above all tyrants, whether ihey 
be Turks or Saracens, How minister lliey proving of 
testaments ? How causes of wedlock ? or if any man 
die intestate ? If a poor man die, and leave his wife 
and half a dozen young children^ and but one cow to fmd 
them, that will they have for a mortuary mercy-lease : let 
come of wife and children what wilL Yea, let any thing 
be done against their pleasure, and they will interdict the 
whole realm, sparing no person. 

Read die chronicles of England (out of which yet they 
have put a great part of their wickedness,) and thou shalt 
find diem always lK>th rebellious and disobedient to the 
kings, and also churlish and unthankful^ so that when all 
the realm gave the king somewhat to maintain liim in his 
right, they would not give a mite. Consider the story 
of king John^ where I doubt not but they have put the 
best aud fairest for themselves^ and the worst of king 
John- For 1 suppose they make the chronicles them- 
selves. Compare the doings of their holy church (as they 
ever call it) tmto the learning of Christ and of his apostles. 
Did not the legate of Konie assoil all the lords of die 
realm of their due obedieuce which they ought to the 
king by the ordinance of God? Would he not have 
cursed the king with liis solemn pomp, because he would 
have done that office which God commandeth every king 
to do, and wherefore God hath put the sword in every 
king's hand ? diat is to wit, because king John would 
have punished a wicked clerk that had coined false 
money. The laymen that had not done half so great 
faults must dicj but the clerk mustt go esca[)e free ! SenI 
not the pope also unto the king of France remission of 
his sins, to go and conquer king John's realm ? So now 
remission of sins cometh not by faith in the testament that 
God hath made in Christ*s blood ; but by fighting and 
murdering for the pope's pleasure. Last of alj, was nol 



Tyhdalb.] a christian MAN. 375 

king John fain to deliver his crown unto the legate, and 
to yield up his realm unto the pope, wherefore we pay 
Peter-pence. They might be called the polling-pence of 
foke prophets well enough. They care not by what mis- 
chief they come by their purpose. War and conquering 
of lands is their harvest The wickeder the people are, 
the more they have the hypocrites in reverence, the more 
they fear them, and the more they believe in them. And 
tbey that conquer other men's lands, when they die, make 
theta their heirs, to be prayed for for ever. Let there come The keep* 
one conquest more in the realm, and thou shalt see them o/g<^7 
get yet as much more as they have (if they can keep down ^^^ Pi^ 
God's word, that their juggling come not to light) yea, ^^'g ipi* 

tbou shalt see them take the realm whole into their hands, f^^^^^'" 

, honour. 

and crown one of themselves king thereof. And verily, 
I see no other likelihood, but that the land shall be shordy 
conquered. The stars of the Scripture promise us none 
odier foilune, inasmuch as we deny Christ with the wicked 
Jews, and will not have him reign over us ; but will be 
still children of darkness under antichrist, and antichrist's 
ponession, burning the gospel of Christ, and defending 
a £uth that may not stand with his holy Testament. 

If any man shed blood in the church, it shall be inter- 
dicted till he have paid for the hallowing. J f he be not 
•bfe, die parish must pay, or else shall it stand always in- 
terdict^. They will be avenged on them that never 
o&nded. Full well prophesied of them Paul, in the 
2d Epistle to Tim. chap. iii. Some man will say, Wouldest 
tbou diat men should fight in the church unpunished ? Nay, 
ballet die king ordain a punishment for them, as he doth 
for them that fight in his palace, and let not all the parish 
be troubled for one's fault. And as for their hallowing, it 
is the juggling of antichrist. A Christian man is the 
temple of God and of the Holy Ghost, and hallowed in 
Christ's blood. A Christian man is holy in himself, by 
leason of the Spirit that dwelleth in him ; and the place 
wherein he is is holy by reason of him, whether he be in 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 




[TVKDALR. 



ThB MiJtiqp 

of Rfjcbei- 
tcr is a fit 
puttorn lo 
judge ilII 
the rest of 
•Jfiniry by » 




the field or town. A Christian husband sanctiiieth an 
unchristian wife, and u Cliristiati wife an uncliristiaii hui^ 
band, (as concerning the use of matrimony) saith Paul to 
tlie Corindiians. If now while we seek to be hallowed in 
Christy we are found unholy, and must be hallowed by the 
ground, or place, or walls, then died Christ in vsiin. How- 
beit, antichrist must have wheremth to sit in meu ^ con- 
sciences, and ta make them fear where u no fear, and 
to rob them of their faith, and to make tliem trust in 
that cannot help them, and to seek holiness of that which 
is not holy in itself. 

After that the old king of France was brought down out 
of Italy, mark what pageantis have been played^ and what 
are yet a playing to separate us from the emperor, (lest by 
the help or aid of us he should be able to recover his right 
of the pope) and to couple us to the Frenchmen, whose 
might the pope ever abuseth to keep the emperor from 
Italy. What prevaileth it for any king to marry his 
daughter or his son, or to make any peace or good ordi* 
nance for the wealth of his realm ? For it shall no longer 
last tlmn it is profitable to them. Their reason is so secret 
that the world cannot perceive it* They dissimil those 
things which they are only cause of, and simil discord 
among themsehes when they are most agreed. One shall 
hold this, and another shall dispute the contrar)' : but 
the conclusion shall be tliat most maintaineth ilieii false- 
hood, though God*s word be never so contrary. What 
have lliey wrought in our days; yea, and what work 
they yet, to the perpetual dishonour of the king, and 
rebuke of the realm, and shame of all the nation, in what- 
soever realms they go ! 

I uttered unto you partly the malicious blindness of Uie 
bishopof Rochester, his juggling, his conveying, his foxey- 
wjliness, his bo-peep, his wresting, renting, and shameful 
abusing of the Scripture ; his oratory and alleging of here- 
tics, and how he would make the apostles authors of blind 
cefewoniesi without signiiicationj contrary to tbeir own 



TVNDALB.] 



A CHRISTIAN MAN. 



3Tr 



i1octiitie» and have set him for ao ensampla to judge all 
oilier by. Whatsoever thou art that readeai this, I exhort 
thee in Christ, to compare his sermon and that whicli I 
I have written, and die Scripture together^ and judge. 
There shall thou find of our holy father's authority, and 
what it in to he great ^ and how to know the greatest^ 

Th^n foUoweth the cause why laymen cannot rule 
temporal offices, which is the falsehood of the bishops. 
There shall thou find of miracles and ceremonies without 
signification ; of false anointing, and lying signs, and false 
names ; and how the spiritualty are disguised in false- 
hood, and iiow diey rule the people in darkness, and do 
all thing in the Latin tongue, and of their petty pillage. 
Their polling is like a soaking consumption, wherein a man 
complaiueth of feebleness and of faintneas, and wottelh not 
whence his disease cometh ; it is like a pock that fretteth 
inward, and consumeth the very marrow of the bones. 

There seest thou the cause why it is impossible for 
kings to come to the knowledge of the truth » For the 
spirits lay await for them, and ser^e their appetites at all 
points ; and through confession, buy and seU and betray 
bolli tJiem and all their true friends, and lay baits for the^iruth 
them, and never leave them till they have blinded them 
with tlieir sophistry, and have brought them into their 
nets- And then when the king is captive, they compel 
all the rest with violence of his sword. For if any man 
will not obey 6iem, be it right or wrong, they cite him, 
suspend him, and curse or excommunicate him* If he 
Uien obey oot, they deliver him to Pilate, that is to say, 
unto the temporal officers, to destroy them^ Last of all, 
there findest thou the very cause of all persecution, which 
is tlie preaching against hypocrisy. 

Then come we to the sacraments, where thou seest 
tliat die work of the sacrament saveth not^ but the faith 
in the promise, which the sacrament signifieth, justifieth 
us only. There hast thou that a priest is but a servant to 
teach only, and whatsoever he taketh upon him more than 



The ranse 
14'hy kings 
Ci>ui4 not 
come to 
the knoir- 
le<lsc pf 




37fi 



THE OBEDIENCE OF 



[TlTNOAiK, 



nre done 
by faitlit 
iind not bj 
ccremo- 



Tlic mc of 



lo preach and to miiii^ter ibe sacmments of Christ, (which 
is also preaching) h falsehoods 

Then conietli liow they juggle through dtimb ceremo- 
nies, and how tliey iniike merchandise m ilh feigned words ; 
penance, a pana et a culpa ^ satisfaction, attritioa^ cha- 
racter^ purgator)^ pick- purse ; ami how through conft^ssion 
they make the sacraments and all the promise of* none 
effect or value. There scest tliou that absolving is Lut 
preaching the promises \ andcurstugor excomniunicatingp 
preaching tlie law ; and of their power, and of tlicir keys, 
of false miracles, and praying to saints. There seest thou 
that ceremonies did not the miracles, but faith : ereu aa it 
was not Moses' rod tliat did the miracles, but Moses' 
faith ill the promises of God, Tliou seest ako tliat to 
have a faith where God hath not a promise, is idolatry* 
And there also seest thou how tlte pope exalteth himself 
above God, and commandeth him to obey his tyranny- 
Last of all, thou ha^t tliere that no man ought to preach 
but he that is called* 

Theu followeth the belly-brotherhood of monks and 
friars. For Christ hath deserved nought with them. For 
his sake gettest tfiou no favour. Tliou must offer unto 
tlieir bellies, and then tliey pray bitterly for tliee. Th^re 
seest thou that Christ is the only cause ; yea, and all the 
cause why God doth ought for us, and beareth our com* 
plaints And there hast thou doclrine how to know aud 
to be sure that thou art elect and hast God's spirit in thee« 
And hast there learning to tf)- the doctrine of our spirits. 

Then follow the four senses of the Scripture, of wliich 
three are no senses ; and the fourth, that is to wit the literal 
sense, which is the very sense, hath the poj>e taken to him- 
self. It may have uo other meaning tlian as it plcaseth 
his fatherhood* We must abide lils interpretation* And 
as his belly thinks, so must we thiuk, though it be impos* 
sible to gather any such meaning of the Scripture* Then 
nast tliou the very use of allegories, and how they are 
nothing but ensamples borrowed of the Scripture to ex- 



Tyhdalb.] a christian MAN. 379 

press a text or an open conclusion of the Scripture, and as 

it were to paint it before thine eyes, that thou mayest feel 

the meaning and the power of the Scripture in thine heart. 

Then cometh the use of worldly similitudes, and how T**^.""*?^ 

, ... umilitudes* 

they are false prophets which bring a worldly smiiUtude 

for any other purpose, save to express more plainly that 

which IS contained in an open text. And so are they also 

which draw the Scripture contraiy to the open places, and 

contrary to the ensample, living, and practising of Christ, 

the apostles, and of the holy prophets. And then, finally, 

hast thou of our holy father's power, and of his keys, and 

of his binding and excommunicating, and of his cursing 

and blessing, with ensamples of every thing. 



THE 



PRACTICE OF PRELATES 



WHETHER THE KING'S GRACE MAY BE SEPARATED FROM HIS 
QUEEN, BECAUSE SHE WAS HIS BROTHER'S WIFE. 



•v« 









WILLIAM TYNDALE 



CHRISTIAN READER. 



Xl/^HEN the old scribes and pharisees had 
darkened the Scripture with their traditions^ 
and false interpretations^ and wicked persua- 
sions of fleshly wisdom ; and shut up the king- 
dom of heaven, which is God's word, that the 
people could not enter in unto the knowledge 
of the true way, as Christ complaineth in the 
gospel ; (Matt, xxiii.) then they sat in the hearts ^»"- **"* 
of men with their false doctrine, in the stead 
of God and his word, and slew the souls of the 
people to devour their bodies, and to rob them 
of their worldly substance. But when Christ 
and John the Baptist had restored the Scripture 
again unto the true understanding, and had ut- 
tered their falsehood, and improved their tradi- 
tions, and confounded their false interpretations 
with the clear and evident texts, and with power 
of the Holy Ghost, and had brought all their 
juggling and hypocrisy to light; then they gat 
them unto the elders of the people, and per- An old 
suaded them, saying. This man is surely of the KT^phari^^ 
devil, tuid his miracles be of the devil- no doubt. ««c«, newly 

' . practised 

And these good works which he doth in healing by the pope 
the people, yea, and his preaching against our prelates. 



3di 



PREFACE TO 



[Tyndalr. 



Worldly 
prffer- 
meaii &ff 
lets to true 
ChruLiab- 
iiy. 



Tbe .Jews 
cusetl' 



covetousness^ are but a cloak to bring him 
mito bis purpose^ that when he hath gotten him 
disciples enoughj he may rise against the em- 
peror and raake himself king^ And then shall 
the Romans come and take our land from us^ 
and carry away our people^ and put other na- 
tions in our realm : and so shall we lose all tliat 
we have^ and the most part of onr lives thereto. 
Take heed, therefore, betimes, while there is 
remedy^ ere he go so far that ye be not able to 
resist him. 

The elders of the people, which were rich and 
wealthy, though before they in a manner favoured 
Christ, or at the least way were indifferent, not 
greatly caring whether God or the devil reigned, 
so that they might bide in their authority, feared 
immediately (as Herod did of the loss of his 
kingdom, when the wise men asked where the 
newborn kiogof the Jews was) and conspired with 
the Scribes and Pharisees against Christ, and 
took him and brought him unto Pilate, saying, 
We have found this fellow perverting the peo- 
ple, and forbidding to pay tribute unto Csesar, 
and saying that he is king, and moving the peo- 
ple from Gahlee unto this place. Then Pilate, 
though he likewise wa^ before indifferent, put 
now in fear of the loss of his office, through 
such persuasions, slew innocent Christ And in 
very deed, as the scribes and pharisees were 
all their lives before blind guides unto the de- 
struction of their souls, even so were they at 
their last end blind prophets unto the destruction 



TvNtlALK,] 



THE READER. 



SBfi 



of their bodies. For after that they had slain 
Christ and divers of his apostles^ and persecuted 
those poor wretches that believed on him^ God, 
to aveng-e the poor innocent blood that bare 
witness unto the truth, poured his wrath among 
them, that they themselves rose against the 
emperor. And the Bomans came^ (according 
as they blindly prophesied) and slew the most 
part of them, and carried the rest captive into 
all uationSj and pnt other nations in the realm. 
But whose fault was that insurrection against the 
emperor^ and mischief that followed ? Chirst's 
and his apostles, whom they falsely accused be- 
forehand? Nay, Christ taught that they should 
give Caesar that periaineth unto CaDsar, and God 
that which belonged to God: even that they 
should give Caesar lawful their bodily service, 
and God the heart ; and that they should love 
God's law, and repent of their evil, and come 
aud receive mercy, and let the wrath of God be 
taken from off them. And the apostles taught 
that all souls should obey the higher powers, or 
temporal rulers : but their obstinate malice, that 
so hardened their hearts that they could not 
repent^ and their railing upon the open and 
manifest truth, which they could not improve, 
and resisting the Holy Ghost, and slaying of 
the preachers of righteousness, brought the 
wrath of God upon them, and was cause of their 
utter destruction. 

Even so our scribes and pharisees, now that 
their hypocrisy is disci osedj and their falsehood 

VOL. II, 2 c 



Tlvc cnu'l 
JewSp hf 

Chnit and 

cured tlit 
re.tigennc< 
of God la 
tigbieii 

tUetn- 



The upon > 
tle^ taught 
all obc- 





286 



PREFACE TO 



[Tykdale* 



Tlie prac- 
tice ofotir 
preidtea in 
tUese dnys. 



MtloilCif 

icr|ient8, 



SO brougfit to lig^lit^ that it can no longer be hid, 
get tliem unto the elders of the people, the 
lords^ gentlemeDj and temporal officers, and to 
all that love this world as they do ; and unto who- 
soever is great with the king, and unto the 
king^s grace himself ; and after the same en- 
sample, and with the same persuasions, cast them 
into like fear of losing of their worldly domi- 
nions, and roar unto them, saying, Ye be neg* 
ligent, and care nothing at all, but have a good 
sport that the heretics rail on us. But give them 
space a while till they be grown unto a multi- 
tude, and then ye shall see them preach as fast 
against you, and move the people against you, 
and do their best to thrust you down also, and 
shall cry^ Havoc, and make all common, O gene- 
ration of serpents, how well declare ye that ye 
be the right sons of the father of all lies. For 
they which ye call heretics preach nothing save 
that which our Saviour Jesus Christ preached, 
and his apostles, adding nought thereto, nor 
plucking ought therefrom, as the Scripture com- 
mandeth ; and teach all men to repentance to 
God and his holy law, and faith unto our Saviour 
Jesus Christ, and the promises of mercy made 
in him, and obedience unto all that God eom- 
mandeth to obey. Neither teach we so much as 
to resist your most cruel tyranny with bodily 
violence, save with God*s word only ; intending 
nothing but to drive you out of the temple of 
Christ, the hearts, consciences, and souls of 
men, (wherein with your falsehood ye sit) and to 



TrMUALK,] 



THE READER. 



587 



restore again Jesus our Saviour unto his pos- 
session and inheritance, bought with his blood, 
whence ye have driven him out with your mani- 
fold wiles and subttlty. 

Take heed, therefore^ wicked prelates, blind 
leaders of the blinds indurate and obstinate hy- 
pocrites, take heed. For if the pharisees for 
their resisting the Holy Ghost, that is to say, 
persecuting the open and manifest truth, and 
claying the preachers thereof, escaped not the 
wrath and vengeance of God ; how shall ye 
escape, which are far worse than the pharisees ? 
For though the pharisees had shut up the Scrip- 
ture and set up their own professions ; yet they 
kept their own professions, for Ihe most part. 
But ye will be the chiefest in Chris t*s flock, and 
yet will not keep one jot of the right way of his 
doctrine. Ye have thereto set up wonderful 
professions, to be more holy thereby than ye 
think that Christ's doctrine is able to make you, 
and yet keep as little thereof, (except it be with 
dispensations) insomuch that if a roan ask you, 
what your marvellous fashioned playing coats, 
and your other puppetry mean, and what your 
disfigured heads, and all your apish play mean, 
ye know not; and yet are they but signs of 
things which ye have professed. Thirdly, ye 
will be papists and hold of the pope ; and yet, 
look in the pope's law, and ye keep thereof 
almost nought at all but whatsoever sonndeth to 
make for your bellies, and to maintain your 
honour^ whether in the Scripture^ or in your own 



A good lull. 
monitioEi to 
All blind 
guides. 




'2 C 



Our pre- 
InCcs seek 
to be cliief 



SfrnrmB of 
Ni^tA set tip 
bj'tlie iwpe 
find hit 
[ireliLtes, 



Our pre^ 
lalc« pro- 
fess Ibe 
pnpe to be 
Ibeir Lord, 
but yet 
keep no 
part of bii 




368 



PREFACE TO 



[Tyndalr, 



Tlic pope's 
clergy are 



to nil 
riilurs. 



traditions, or in the pope's law ; that ye compel 
the lay people to observe violently^ threatening 
them with vour excommunieations and curses, 
that they shall be damned^ both body and sou!, 
if they keep thera not. And if that help you 
not, then ye murder them mercilessly with the 
sword of the tern pond powers^ whom ye have 
made so blind, that they be ready to slay whom 
ye command, and will not yet hear his cause 
examined, nor give him room to answer for 
himself. 

And ye elders of the people, fear ye God also. 
For as the elders of the Jews which were par- 
takers with the scribes and pharisees in resisting 
the Holy Ghost, and in pei'secuting the open 
truth, and slaying the witnesses thereof, and in 
provoking the wrath of God, had their part with 
them also in the day of wrath and sharp ven- 
geance, which shortly after fell upon thera, as the 
nature of the sin against the Holy Ghost is, to have 
her damnation, not only in the world to coma, 
but also in this life> according unto all the en- 
samples of the Bible and authentic stories since 
the world began : even likewise ye, if ye will 
wink in so open and clear light, and let your- 
selves be led blindfold^ and have your part with 
the hypocrites in like sin and mischief, be sure ye 
shall have your part with them in like wrath and 
vengeance, that is like shortly to fall upon them. 

And concerning that the hypocrites put you 
in fear of the rising of your commons against 
you, I answer; If ye fear your commons, so tes- 



TvXDAtr ] 



THE HEADER. 



389 



tify ye against yourselves that ye are tyrants. 
For if your consciences accused you not of evil 
doing, what need ye to fear your commons? 
What commons was ever so evii that they I'ose 
against their heads for well doing? Moreover, 
ye witness against yourselves also that ye have 
no trust in God, For he hath promised the tem- 
poral officers assistance, if they minister their 
offices truly, and to care for the keeping of them, 
as much as they care for to keep his laws. 

The hypocrites haply bid you take an ensam- 
ple of the uplandish people of A 1 many, which 
they lie that Martin Luther stirred up. For 
first, what one sentence in all the writing of 
Martin Luther find they that teacheth a man to 
resist his superior? Moreover, if Martin Luther 
and the preachers had stirred up the common 
people of Germany, how happened it that Martin 
Luther and other Uke preachers had not perished 
likewise with them, which are yet all alive at this 
hour? Ye will ask me. Who stirred them up then? 
I ask yoQ, Who stirred up the commons of the 
Jews to resist the emperor, after that the scribes 
and phaiisees, with the elders of the people, had 
slain Christ and his apostles? Verily, the wrath 
of God. And even so here, the wrath of God 
stirred them up ; partly to destroy the enemies 
and persecutors of the truths and partly to take 
vengeance on those carnal beasts which abused 
the gospel of Christ, to make a cloak of it to 
defend their fleshly liberty, and not to obey it^ 
and to save their souls thereby » 



TUc com- 
moa pet- 

iiacfl by 
hypQcntcs- 



Tlie pojie a 
clergy *re 



Tliic wrath 
of Gnii 
stirretli up 
the pi'oplo 
to destroy 
the etie- 

pcraecuton 
of the 
truth, 



PREFACE TO 



[Tykpalk. 



Gud is the 
flcferiiliT of 
kmg^ Muit 



kiug» and 
rulers thill 
pct'secute 
God*s mi* 
nistera, are 
die trou- 
ble rs of 
themselves 
Rtid tlifir 
renitii, iiD.il 
not the 



Am la&ay as 
will be the 
discittlei of 
Cbribt, 

TniiM learn 
o( Uim 
nicekneia 
and oiiedt- 
ence lo ilje 
liigber 



If kiiigSj lords J and great meiij tberefore, fear 
the loss of this world; let tliem fear God also. 
For in fearing God shall they prolong their days 
upon the earth, and not with fighting against 
God. The earth is God*s only, and bis favonr 
and mercy doth prolong the days of kings in 
their estate, and not their own power and might. 

And let all men (be they never so great) 
hearken unto thi^, and let this be an answer unto 
them. Wicked king Ahab said unto the prophet 
Elias, Art tltou he that troubles! Israel? and 
Elias answered, It is not 1 that trouble Israel, 
but thou and thy father's liouseliold, in that ye 
have forsaken the commandments of the Lord 
and follow idols. Even so the preachers of the 
truth, which rebuke siuj are not the troublers of 
realms and commonwealths^ but they that do 
wickedly; and namely, high prelates and mighty 
princeSj which walk without the fear of God and 
live abotnioablyj corrupting the common people 
with their ensample. They be they that bring the 
wrath of God on all realms^ and trouble all com- 
monwealths with war, dearth, poverty, pestilence, 
evil luck, and alt misfortune. 

And unto all subjects be it said, if they profess 
the law of God and faith of the Lord Jesus, and 
will be Christ's disciples ; then let them remem- 
ber that there was never man so great a subject 
as Christ was ; there was never creature that 
suffered so great unright, so patiently^ and so 
meekly as he. Therefore, whatsoever they have 
been in times past, let them now think that it is 



TVNDALK,] 



THE READEIL 



391 



N 



their parts to be subject in the lowest kind of 
subjection^ and to sufier all things patiently. 
If the high powers be cruel unto you with 
natural cruelty, then with softness and patience 
ye shall either win them or mitigate their fierce- 
ness* If they join them unto the pope, and 
persecute you for your faith and hope which ye 
have in the Lord Jesus; then call to mind that ^'^'"^''^ 



ye be chosen to suffer here with Christ, that ye <^i*'**t,t!" 



_, _, joy 

may joy with them in the life to come, with joy wituhim 

! everlasting, that shall infinitely pass this your to come- 
short pain here. If they command that God 
forbiddeth, or forbid that God command eth, 
th 
G 
B 



^ 



^ 



then answer as the apostles did; (Acts v.) That 
God must be obeyed more than man. If they com- 
pel you to suffer unright, then Christ shall help 
ou to bear, and his Spirit shall comfort you. 
But only see that neither they put you from 
God*s word, nor ye resist them with bodily vio- 
lence- But abide patiently awhile, till the hy- 
pocrisy of hypocrites be slain with the sword of 
God's word, and until the word be openly pub- 
lished and witnessed unto the powers of the 
world, that their blindness maybe without excuse. 
And then will God awake as a fierce lion, against ^f JJ^^^}^ [ 
those cruel wolves which devour his lambs, and ^^^ ^p<>^ 
will play with the hypocrites, and compass them mnts. 
in their own wiles; and send them a dasing in 
the head, and a swimming in their brains ; and 
destroy them with their own counsel. And then 
those malicious and wilfol blind persecutors, 
which refusing mercy when they were called 





SM 



PREFACE lO THB RBA2»SR. 



{XvumML 



Islbe tm- 
liie Ibllow- 
Iwitsbeir- 

tbicMMf* 



t hereto, chose rather to have their part with hy- 
pocrites ill shedding of innocent bloody shall be 
partakers with them also in having their own blood 
shed again, God giving an occasion that one 
wicked shall destroy another- 

And as for wickedness^ whence it springe th^ 
and who is the cause of all insurrection, and of 
the fall of princes, and the shortening of their 
days upon the earth, thou shalt see in the glass 
following, which I have set before thine eyes, 
not to resist the hypocrites with violence (which 
vengeance pertaineth unto God) ; but that thou 
mightest see their wicked ways and abominable 
paths, to withdraw thyself from after them, and 
to come again to Christ, and walk in his hght, and 
to follow his steps, and to commit the keeping 
both of thy body and soul also unto him, and 
unto the Father through him, whose name be glo- 
rious for ever. Amen, 




PRELATES, APPOINTED TO PREACH CHRIST, 
MAY NOT LEAVE GOD'S WORD, AND MI- 
NISTER TEMPORAL OFFICES; BUT OUGHT 
TO TEACH THE LAY PEOPLE THE RIGHT 
WAY, AND LET THEM ALONE WITH ALL 
TEMPORAL BUSINESS. 



r^URSaviourJesus Christ answered Pilate, (John xviii.) 
that his kingdom was not of this world. And 
Matthew, in the tenth, he saith. The disciple is not greater 
than his master ; but it ought to suffice the disciple that he be 
as his master is. Wherefore if Christ's kingdom be not of 
this world, nor any of his disciples may be otherwise than he 
was, then Christ's vicars, which minister his kingdom 
here in his bodily absence, and have the oversight of his 
flock, may be none emperors, kings, dukes, lords, knights, 
temporal judges, or any temporal officer, or under false 
names have any such dominion, or minister any such 
office as requireth violence. 

And (Matt, vi.) No man can serve two masters; Where 
Christ concludeth saying: Ye cannot serve God and 
mammon; that is riches, covetousness, ambition, and tem- 
poral dignities. 

And (Matt, xx.) Christ called his disciples unto him, 
and said : Ye know that the lords of the heathen people 
have dominion over them ; and they that be great do 
exercise power over them. Howbeit, it shall not be so 
among you; but whosoever vrill be great among you 
shall be your minister; and he that will be chief shall be 
your servant : even as the Son of man came not that men 
should minister unto him, but for to minister and give his 
life for the redemption of many. Wherefore the officers 
in Christ's kingdom may have no temporal dominion or 
jurisdiction, nor' execute any temporal authority or law of 



John : 



Matt. X. 



The minis- 
ters of 
Christ's 
doctrine 
may not 
have any 
temporal 
offices. 



Matt. vi. 



Matt. XX. 



The officers 
in Christ's 
kingdom 
may have 
no tempo- 
ral domi- 
nion. 



394 



THE PRACTICE 



[Tyndalk, 



Matt, xvili. 



Violence^ nor may Imve any like manner among lliein. 
But cleati cpntrary : they must caM the mseUci down under 
all J and become servants unto all^ suffer of all, and bear 
the burthen of every nian^s infirnHties, and go before them, 
and iight for them against tlie worltl with the sword of 
God's word^ even unto tlie deatJjj after the ensample of 
Chriiit* 

And (Matt* xviiii) when the disciples asked who should 
be greatest in the kingdom of heaven, Christ called a 
young child unto him^ and set him in the midst among 
them, saying i Except je turn back^ and become as chil- 
dren^ ye shall not enter in the kingdom of heaven « Now 
young children bear no rule one over another, but all is 
fellowship among tliem. And he said, moreover^ Who- 
soever hunibleth himself after tlie ensample of this child, 
he is greatest in tlie kingdom of heaven ; diat is, to be (as 
concerning ambition and worldly desire) so childish^ that 
thou couldst not heave thyself above thy brotherj is the 
very bearing of rule, and to be great in Christ's kingdom. 
And to describe the very fashion of the greatness of his 
kingdom, lie said. He that receiveth one such child in my 
name, receiveth me. What is that to receive a child In 
Christ's name ? verily, to submit^ to meek, and to humble 
thyself, and to cast tliyself under all men ; and to consider 

n^me, wimt all men's infirmities and weaknesses ; and to help to heal 
their diseases with the word of truth, and to live purely, 
that they see no contrary ensample in thee, to whatsoever 
tliou teachest them in Christ ; tJiat thou put no stumbling 
block before them, to make them fall while they be yet 
young and weak in the faitli : but that thou abstain, as 

J Tliess. V. Paul teacheth, (1 Thess, v,) Ab omni specie mala^ from 
all that might seem evil, or whereof a man might surmise 
amisf ; and that thou so love tliem, that whatsoever gift of 
God in thee is, tliou think the same theirs, and their food, 
and for their sakes given unto tliee, a^ the truth is, and 
that all tlieir infirmities be thine, and that thou feel them, 
and that thine heait mourn for them ; and that with all thy 



To receive 

ft child in 
Christ's 



rNDALE.] 



OF PRELATES, 



305 






power thou lielp to amend thorn, and ceast: not to cry to 
God for them, neither dav^ nor night : and that tliou lei 
nothing he found in Utee^ that any mau may rehuke, but 
\viiaUot^\er thou teachesl them, liiat be thou : and that 
thou be not a wolf in il lamb'^ skin, aii our holy father the 
pope IS) which cometh unto ua In a name of hy[K>criBy^ 
suid in the title of cursed Chanij or Ham, calling hiniaelf 
rvus servortimf the servant of all servants, and is yet 
found tyrannus tt/rtmHOnim^ of all tyrants the most cruel. 
Thia is to receive young children in CUrist*s name ; and 
to receive young children, in Christ's name, b to bear rule 
in the kingdom of Christ. Thus ye see, that Christ's 
kingdom i^ altogether spiritual, and the bearing of rule 
ill it is clean contrary unto the bearing of rule temporally. 
Wherefore none that beareth rule in it may have any tem- 
poral jurisdiction^ or minister any temporal office that 
recjuireUi violence to compel withah 



'flie pope 
if n tpi}\f 
In a laiijU*Ei 
skin. 



, PETER WAS NOT GREATER THAN THE OTHER 
} APOSTLES, BY ANY AUTHORITY GIVEN HIM 
OF CHRIST. 



I 



T^HEY say that Peter was chief of the apostles^ verily, 
m Apelles was called chief of painters, for hi?* ex- 
cellent cunning above others, even so Peter may be called 
chief of llie apostles, for his activity and boldness above 
the other : but that Peter had any authority or rule over 
his brethren and fellow apostles, is false, and contrary to 
the Scripture- Christ forbade it the last, even before his 
passion, and ui divers times before, and taught alway the 
contrary, as 1 have rehearsed. 

Thou wilt say : Thou canst not see how there should be 
any good order in that kingdom, where none were better 
dian other, and where the superior had not a law and au- 



Wby Fet«r 

wail caJleil 
diief of the 

epostJea. 



Pf ter Kad 
no aiitbo- 
Tily aUore 
tb*; rest of 
tlie apOH* 
ties. 





3D6 



THE PRACTICE 



[Ttxdalii. 



The pop**» 
kingdom is 
of the 
world. 

A rub hie ot 
the [>ope''s 
|^iiar<], that 
wii^r (us 



TIte mi 'lis- 
ters of tbe 
kiD^^duiti 
of Gotl 
must got' 
ern with 
all luv^e, 
met'kiiGsi, 
luid pit- 
lieiice. 



Peter in 

use of 
S|>eaLking^ 
fr»r iu!i 
diligence, 
h csiUed 
(but iitjt la 
the Scrip- 
ture) ihe 
chief of the 
a|>oatJc». 



ihorky to compel the iriferiar ^illi violence* The world, 
trulyj can see no other way to rule than with violence. 
For lliere no man abi^taineth from evil^ but for fear ; because 
the love of righteousness is not written in their hearts. 
And therefore, the pope*s kingdom is of the world. For 
there one aort are your grace, your holiness, your father- 
hood I anotlier, my lord bishops my lord abbot, my lord 
prior: another^ master doctor, father^ bachelor ^ master 
parson, master vicar, and at the last cometh in simple sir 
John* And every man reigneth over other with might, 
and have every ruler his prison, his jailor, his chains, his 
torments, even so much as the friars' observants observe 
that ride, and compel every man other, with violence 
above the cnielness of the heathen tyrants : so tliat what 
cometh once in, may never out for fear of telling tales out 
of schooL They rule over the body with violence, and 
compel it, whether the heart will or not, to obser\'e things 
of their own making. 

But in the kingdom of God it is contrary* For the 
Spirit that bringeth them thither, maketh them w tiling , and 
giveth them lust unto the law of God : and love compelleth 
them to work, and love maketh every man^s good, and all 
that he can do common unto his neighbour's need. And 
as every man is strong in that kingdom, so love compelleth 
him to take the weak by the hand, and to help him^ and 
to take him that cannot go upon his shoulders and bear 
him. And so to do service unto the weaker, is to bear 
rule in that kingdom. 

And because Peter did exceed the other apostles in 
fervent service toward his brethren, therefore is he called, 
not in the Scripture, but in the use of speaking, the 
chiefest of the apostles, and not that he had any dominion 
over them* Of which truth thou mayesi see also the 
practice in the Acts of the Apostles, after the resurrection. 
For when Peter had been and preached in the house of 
Cornelius I an heathen man, the other that were circitm- 
cised chode him, because he had been in an uncircumcised 



rYlltU4Lli.] 



OF PRELATES. 



397 



laii's hou«e, and had eaten with him, for it wa« forbidden 
in the law, neither wist they yet that the heathen should 
be called* And Peter was fain to give accounts unto 
them^ (which is no token of superiority) and to ^hew them 
how he was warned of the Holy Ghost so to do, 
(Acts xi,) 

And {Acts XV.) when a counci! wjis gathered of the 
Ipostles and disci pi es^ about the circumcision of the 
heathen, Peter brought forth, not his commandment and 

Llhe authority of ids %icarship, but the miracle that the 
loly Ghost had shewed for the lieathen, how at the 
preactung of the gospel the Holy Ghost had lighted upon 
ihetn, and puritied dieir hearts through faith ; and there- 
fore proved that they ought not to be circumcised, 
I And Paul mid Barnabas brought forth tiie miracles also 
that God had shelved by them among the heathen, through 
preaching of faith. And then James brought forth a 
prophecy of the Old Testament, for the said part : and 
therewith the adversaries gave over their hold, and they 
concluded with one assent, by the authority of the Scrip* 
lire, and of the Holy Ghost, that tlie headien should not 
' be circumcised ; and not by the commandment of Peter, 
under pain of cursing, excommunication, and hiterdicting, 
and like bugs^ to make fools and children afraid withaL 

And (Acts viii.) Peter was sent of the other apostles 

^unto the Samaritans, which is an evident token lliat he 

had no jurisdiction over them, (for tlien they could not 

"have sent him,) btit rather (as the truth is,) that the con- 

. gregation had authority over him, and over alt other private 

ersons, to admit them for ministers, and send Uiem forth 

to preach, whitliersoever tlie Spirit of God moved them, 

and as tliey saw occasion. 

And in the Epistle unto the Galatians thou seest also, 
how Paul corrected Peter, when he walked not the straight 
way after the truth of the gospel. So now thou seest that 
in the kingdom of Christ and in his church or congrega- 
tion, and in his councils, the ruler is the Scripture ap- 



enfdired to 
reuder nii 
account to 
bis bn*- 
tlireii, otlm 



Petrr 
sheirt^d no 
jmrt of his 
authority, 
but the 
miffhty 
poivi*r of 
Gotl, 



All the 

alicgtf llie 
antborUy 
of God i [I 
Christ, and 
tio autho- 
rity of 
thuir own. 



Petrir was 
sent by the 
other BpojJ- 
tlcs Uy 
preach iii 
SiimiiriE^ 



Gill, lu 

Paul re- 
buked Peter 
to his face. 




398 



THE PRACTICE 



[Tyndal». 



Scripture 
is the cliief- 
est ot tlie 
api>St1es. 

We g:lve 
tbe iiiidis, 
ters reve- 
rence, not 
for tlicm- 
Eclveii, but 
licraiii^c of 
the word 
tbnt tb«^ 
nriniater* 



proved through the miracles of the Holy Ghost : and men 
be servants only, and Christ h the head^ and we ail 
brethren : and when we call men our headij, tliat \fte do 
not because tliey be shorn or shaven, or because of their 
names, parson^ vicar, bishop, pope ; but only because of 
the word which they preach ♦ If they err from tlie Mord, 
then may whosoever God moveth his heart, play Pa til and 
correct him* If he will not obey the Scripture, then have 
his brethren authority by the Scripture to put him down, 
and send him out of Christ^s church among tlie heretics, 
which prefer their false doctrine above the true word of 
Christ p 



HOW THE GOSPEL PUNISHETH TRESPASSERS, 
AND HOW BY THE GOSPEL WE OUGHT TO 
GO TO LAW WITH OUR ADVERSARIES. 



MttU Xriii. 



Our bre- 
tbrea wbea 
tbeyoflvrid, 
Diitst be re- 
foftni'd bf 
lore, and 
not by 
rlfouf* 



'J'HOUGH that they of Christ's congregation be all 
willing; yet, because that tlie most part is alway 
weak, and because also that the occasions of the world be 
ever many and great, insomuch that Christ, which wist all 
thing before hand, saith, {Matt, xviii,) Woe be unto the 
world by reason of occasions of evil : and saith also, that it 
caimol be avoided, but tliat occasions shall come, therefore 
it cannot be chosen, but that many shall overfall when a 
weak brother hath trespassed : by what law shall he be 
punished? verily^ by the law of love, whose properties 
thou readest in the 1st Cor* xiii. If the love of God, 
which is my profession, be written in mine heart, it will 
not let me hate my weak brother when he bath offended 
me, no more than natural love will let a mother hate her 
child when it trespasseth against her* My weak brother 
hath offended me, — he is fallen, his weakness hath overtliroviii 
hint : it is not right by the law of love, that I should now 




I 



fM upon i lilts, and tread bim duwii in the mire aiid de^tmy 
hiin utterly : but it is rigUt^ by the law of lave, tliat I run 
to him and help hitii up agaiu« 

By what proce^js we ^should go to law with our tres- 
passers, Christ teacheth us Matt. x:viii. Tell him liis 
fault between hini and thee w ith all meekness, remenibenng 
thou art a man, and may est fall also : if he repent and 
thou love him, ye shall soou agree, aud then forgive him. 
And when thou forgivest thy neighbour^ then thou art sure 
that God forgiveth Uiee thy trespasses by his holy promise, 
(Matt, vl.) Jf he hear tliee not, then take a neighbour or 
tM'O* If he hear tliem not, tlien tell the congregation 
where tliou art : aud let the preacher pronounce God's 
law against liim, and let the sad and discreet men rebuke 
him and exhort liim unto rej>entance* If he repent, and 
Uiou aUo love bim according to thy profession, ye shall 
£(Oou agree. If he hear not the congregation, then let 
him be taken us an heaUien. If he that is offended be 
weak also, then let them tliat be strong go between, and 
help tliem. And in Uke manner if any sin against tlie 
doctrine of Christ, aud the profession of a Christian man, 
eo that he be a drunkard and an whore-keeper, or what- 
loever open sin he do, or if he teach false learning, then 
let such be rtjbuked openly before the congregation^ aud 
by the authority of Scripture. And if they repent not, let 
them be put out of the congregation as heathen people. 
If they then be not ashamed^ we have no remedy, but 
patiently to abide what God will do ; and to pray in the 
nieanUme, that God w ill open their hearts, and give them 
lepentance. OUier law than tliis Christ's gospel know eth 
not, nor the officers thereof. 

It is manifest, therefore^ that the kingdom of Christ is a 
spiritual kingdom, which no man can minister well, and a 
temporal kingdom too, as it is sufficiently proved ; because 
that no man which puttetli his hand to the plough, and look- 
Cth back, is apt for the kingdom of heaven, as Christ 
ftiiswered (Luke ix.) unto him that would have followed 



Open And 

oJfvnderi 

are to W 
rebtjkett 
openly. 



doui of 
Chriiit is 
ipirituttl. 




4m 



THE PRACTrCE 



[TYNOA1.K. 



him, but would first have taken leave of his household* 
If a tnait put his baud to the plough of God^s word to preach 
it^ and look abo unto \^orUny business, his plough will 
Liikii li surely go awry* And therefore, saith Christ unto another, 
that would likewise follow him, but desired first to go and 
bury his father; Let the dead bury the dead : but come 
iliou and shew, or preach tlie kingdom of God. As who 
ihould say. He tliat will preach the kingdom of God 
(which 19 Christ's gospel) truly, must have hjs heart 
nowhere else. 



WHAT OPFICEIIS THE APOSTLES ORDAINED IN 
CnRIST S CHURCH, AND WHAT THEIR OFFICES 
WERE TO DO. 



rimt *>r- 
dnineti in 
Christ * 
cltiirdi, 

Bisliop. 



U&mnt 
titled. 



In ilie flfiei 




TX^HEREFORE the apostles following mud obeying 
the rule^ doctriuej and coniitiaudmetit of our Saviour 
Jesus Christi their master^ ordained in his kingdom and 
congregation two officers; one called, after the Greek 
word| bijihopj in English aa overseer : w liich same was 
called priest after the Greek, elder in English because of 
liis age, discretion, and sadness ; for he was as nigh a,i 
could be alway an elderly man ; as thou seest both in tlie 
New and Old Testament also, how the officers of the Jewi 
be called the elders of the people, because (as thou mayest 
well think) they were over old men, as nigh as could be* 
For unto age do men naturally obey, and unto age doth 
God command to give honour, saying, (I^ev, jtix.) Rise up 
before the hoary head, and reverence the face of the old 
man. And also experience of things and coldnesa, without 
which it is hard to rule well, is more in age than in youth* 
And this overseer did pot hi.^ hands unto tlie plough of 
God's word, and fed Christ's flock, and tended tlieni only, 
without looking unto any other business in the world* 



I 



yTXDALlt-] 



OF FllELATES. 



4*H 



Another officer tJiey chose, and called him deacon after 
the Greek, a minister in Eiiglj^ti, to mbiister the ahiis of 
[ the people unto the poor and needy. For in the congre- 
gation of Christ, love maketh every man's gift and goods 
common unto the necessity of his neighbour. Wherefore, 
the love of God being yet hot in die hearL^t of men, the 
rich that had die substance of this! world *3 gtwds, brouglit 
of their abundance great plenty unto the sustentation of die 
poor, and delivered it unto iJie hands of the deacons. 
And unto die help of the deacons were widows of sixty 
years old ; holy, virtuous, and destitute of friends, chosen 
to tend and wait upon the aick, and to wash the saints' 
feel, that came from one congregation unto another, 
whether for any business, or for fear of persecution. And 
liose common goods of die church, offered for die succour 
of tlie poor, grew in all churches so exceedingly, that in 
tK)me congregation it was so much, that it was suDicient 
to maintain an host oi men. Insomuch, diat tyrants did 
ofldmes persecute the Christian for tliose common goods, 
as thuu seest in the life of St. Laurence, the deacon of 
Home. 
L And, moreo^erj the covetousness of the prclalcs was 
*the decay of Christendom, and the increasing of the king- 
dom of Maiiomet. For by the first springing of the em- 
pire of Mahomet, the emperors, kings, and great lords of 
Christendom had given tlieir treasure so mightily unto tlie 
church, what after great victories, and what at their deaths, 
that their successors were not able to maintain batde 
against the Saracens and Turks, (for the world was not 
yet in such captivity that they could make their subjects 
swear on books what diey were worth, and raise up taxes 
at their pleasure) so that a certain writer of stories saiili, 
the prelates gaped when the laymen would take the w:ir 
upon them against the Turks ; and the laymen looked when 
the prelates Mould lay out their money to make tlie war 
withal, and not to spend it in worse use, as the roost part 
them were Mont to do : spending the money that was 

>OL. M- 2ft 




De^^aut 



In ths 

church 
thsy cho»t} 
dearoas 
to iLitni4iter 
to tbc poor* 



Widowip, 



CocomoQ 
goods* ^ 

Tlie greiii 
and ferwiil 
ehfiirUy iit 
thf iintni' 



Tlie tovtt' 
otisrtcvi of 

WAS ttie 
dt^cay of 
ClirtsCen* 
d{>tnj and 
thi! inc reus- 
ing uf tUe 
kingituiii of 
M Alio met. 



Tlic prjtid 
t'lprg)%Uow 
Ihey upent 
I be tr<?rt- 
eurs: of the 
poi>r« 




40S 



THE FRAenCE 



[TVKDALS. 



Isaciut. 

The ekc- 
lion wji» 
confirmed 
hy the em- 
peror. 



Note here 

the trea- 
Mire ttijit 
the bjAliops 
of Rome 
hiicl at this 
time. 



gotten with ulfns and blood of martyrs upon goodly plaie^ 
and great vessels of gold, a»d silver, wilhout care of things 
to come, despising God, whom they worshipped for Uieir 
belly's sake oiily^ and also maiu Moreover, it was the 
custom even then, saiUi the author, to ask what the bishoi)- 
rick was worth : yea, and to leave a worse for a better^ or 
to keep both with a union. And at the same time, Isacius, 
tlie deputy of the emperor, came to Rome to confirm the 
pope in his see with the emperor*s authority ; for the elec- 
tion of the pope wan then nothing worth, except it had 
been confirmed by the emperor : and he found so great 
treasure in tlie church of St. John Lateran, that for 
disdain which he had, that they should have such treasuxe 
ill store, and not to help the emperor in bis wars against 
the Turks, seeing his soldiers lacked wages, he took it 
away with violence against the will of the prelates, of 
which he exiled some, and paid his own men of war with 
one part, and took another part unto himself, and sent tlie 
third part unto tlie emperor ; whicli must needs have been 
a great Lrt^asure in one church. 



BY WHAT MEANS THE PRELATES FELL FROM 
CHRIST. 



ThebUbop X^^ *^^^^ ^^ * bishop was a room at the beginning 



of Hume 
in the 
prim 1 five 
cbtirch 

gerous 
office* 



diat no man coveted, and that no man durst take upon 
him, save he only which loved Christ better than his own 
fife. For as Christ saith, that no man might he his dis- 
ciple, except that he were ready to forsake fife and all : 
even so might tliat officer be sure that it would cost him 
his life at one time or another, for bearing record unto tlie 
truth- But after that the tnultitude of the Christian were 
increased, and many great men had received the faitli, 
then liotli lauds, and rents, as well as other goods were 



rVNf>AL£,] 



OF PRELATES. 



40S 



^ 



;iveii inito llie luaiiiteiLance^ as well uf the clergy, us of 
le poor : Uecaui^e thev gave tlimi uo tithes to the priei^lij, 
nor yet now du^ suve lu certain countries, Foi" it in too 
much to gi\e £iUii«$, offerings, lands, and tithe% also. And 
then the bishops made them substitutes under theui to help 
tliem, which they called priest, and kept the name o( 
bishop unto thentselveSi 

But out of the deacons sprang all the mischief. For 
through their hands went all things : they ministered unto 
the clergy, they nuiUHtered unto the poor, they were in 
favour with great and ^malL And when die bishop's 
office began to have rest, and to be honourable, then tJie 
deacons, throngli favour and gifts, climbed up thereunto, 
ZB lightly he that hath the old abbot's treasure succeedetti 
with %m* And by the means of their practice and ac- 
quaintance in the world, they were more subtle and 
worldly wise than the old bishops^ and less learned in 
od's word I ^ our prelates are, when tliey come from 
rdships in gentlemen's houses, and from surveying 
at men's lands, lord's secrets^ king's counsels, am- 
bassadorship from war, and ministering all worldly matters, 
yen, worldly mischief : and yet now they come not thence, 
but receive all, and bide there still ; yea, they have enacted 
»y plain parliament that they must bide in the court still, 
dse they may not have plurality of beneficeSi And 
by little and little they enhanced themselves, and 
rued all to themselves^ minishing the poor people's part, 
and increasiug their's, and joining acquaintance w ith great 
men, and with their power climbed up, and entitled them 
to the choosing and confirming of the pope and all 
bishops, to tl alter and purchase favour and defenders : 
trusting more unto their worldly wisdom than unto the 
ctrine of Christ, which is the wisdom of God, and unto 
the defence of man tlian of God, Then while they that had 
the plough by the tail looked back, the plough went awry, 
faith waxed feeble and fainty, love waxed cold, the Scrip- 
waxed dark, Christ was no more seen : he was in 

2 B a 



At ilie fiiit 
entry nf 

Chnst'a 
church, 
there wm 
CO Uttie« 
fnid IQ the 
mioislert- 

AIJ cor- 
ruption of 
Ihe ehiircU 
CHtne 6 rat 
out or the 
deacdnii. 



Money 
purcbfiseil 
4)referment 





The pre- 
lates IDUdt 
bide »tUl lA 
theeourt* 



How the 

clergy first 
by riches, 
aad Ihett 
by fialteiyp 
ndvnnced 
thcmselrfi. 





4m 



THE PRACTICE 



[TVNDALP, 



When lUc 

Wiixctl f Ich , 
then tbey 
(lUputctl 
who 

tibouM be 
Ijighest. 



llie mount with Moses^ and therefore the bishops would 
have a god upon ihe earth whom they might see^ and there- 
upon they began to dispute who should be greatest. 



HOW 1 HE BISHOP OF ROME BECAME GREATER 
THAN OTHER, AND CALLED HIMSELF POPE. 



iirht scat of 
nur higU 



ConstJiuti - 
nopU\ 



Haw Rome 

ramc to he 
the chipfeat 
city. 

Rome the 
sent And 

mother of 
otl wicked- 



rUocufi. 



Pfjpe Bonl- 
fAee ihe 
Third. 



'THEN, quoth worldly wisdom^ Jerusalem must be the 
greatest J for that was Christ's seat : Et f actum est : so 
it came to pass for a season. And in conclusion, where 
a great city wm and much riches, there was the bishop 
e%'er greater than lib fellows. Alexandria in Egypt, and 
Antioch m Greece, were greater than their tieighbourH. 
Then those decaying, Constantinople and Rome waxed 
gieatf and strove who should be greater. And Con- 
stantinople said, Wliere the emperor is, there ought to 
be the greatest seat and chiefest bishop. For die em- 
peror lay most at Con^tantitiople, because it was ( I sup- 
pose) nigh the midst of the empire, therefore I must be 
the greatestj said the bishop of Constantinople. Nay, 
quoth the btshop of Rome, though the emperor lie never 
so much at Constantinople^ yet he is called emperor of 
Rome, and Rome is the head of the empire j wherefore 
of right I must be the father of all waten. And ihus, 
whether tliey challenged dicir title by the authority of 
God or mail ; or by Peter or polling, it was all one, so 
they might be greatest. 

And great intercession was made imto the emperors of 
both parties ; but in vain a great season ; for the emperors 
stopped their ears at such ambitious requests long time, 
till at dm last there came an emperor called Phocas, which 
lay long in Italy, and was a very soft man, and a prey 
for prelates. In whose time Boniface fIL v^as bi- 
shop of Hujue. a man Hnibitious and greedy upon honour* 



Tyndale.] 



OF PRELATES. 



405 



and of a very subtle wit, nothing inferior unto Thomas 
Wolsey, cardinal of York. This Boniface was great with 
the emperor Phocas, and with his wily persuasions and 
great intercession together^ obtained of Phocas to be 
called the chiefest of all bishops, and that his church 
should be the chief church. Which authority, as soon 
as he had purchased, he sent immediately his command- 
ment, with the emperor's power, unto all the bishops of 
Almany, commanding that every bishop should call all 
the priests of his diocese, and charge them that every 
man should put away his wife, under pain of exconmiu- 
nication ; which tyranny, though great resistance was made 
iq^nst it, he yet brought to pass with the emperor's 
sword, and his subtilty together. Fof the bishops were 
rich, and durst not displease the pope for fear of the em- 
poor. 

As soon as Nimrod, that mighty hunter, had caught 
this prey, that he had compelled all bishops to be under 
him, and to swear obedience unto him, then he began to 
be great in die earth, and called himself Papa, with this 
interpretation, Fadier of fathers. And when the pope 
^Mi exalted his throne above his fellows, then the unity 
that ought to be among brethren in Christ's church brake ; 
and division began between us and the Greeks ; which 
Greeks (1 suppose) were at that time the one half of 
Christendom. And when any pope since exhorteth them 
to unity, they answer. That he which will reign over his 
bfediren with violence, breaketh unity, and not they ; and 
diat they will not be under his tyranny, whereunto h^ 
cdleth them under a colour of unity. And from hence- 
forth, with the help of his bishops, which were sworn to 
be true liegemen unto him, when beforetime they were 
admitted to their bishoprics of the emperors and kings, 
he began to lay a bait to catch the whole empire into his 
hands also. 



Phocas the 
emperor 
first gave 
pririlege to 
the bUhop 
of Rome to 
be the chief 
bishop. 



The chasti* 
tyof 
priests, 
how it 
came up. 



Note here 
the climb- 
ing up of 
the pope. 



Division in 
the church. 



The Greelcs 
will not be 
under the 
pope's ty- 
ranny. 



^OG 



THE PHAC'llCE 



[TVKDAtK- 



BY WHAT MEANS THE POPE INVADED THE 
EMPIRE. 



Mahonict \ ^f tj^^^ same season . M ahomet. the author of the sect 
pope began of the Turks and SaraceuK, begati. And as soon as 

UmT^ he had got much people unto him with wiles and feigned 

miracles, he invaded the empire of Rome in those quarters- 
And look how busy Mahomet "wm in tliose parts, 90 
busy was the pope in these quarters to invade the empire, 
(with the help of his sworn bishops, which preached all 
of none other God tlian the pope,) while the emperor wma 
occupied afar off iti resisting of Maliomet. 

And within few^ years after, when tJie kings of Italy 
now and then vexed our holy fathers for tlieir covetous 
ambition, then Gregory HI- joined amity with the 
Frenchmen, and called them to help, by whose power 
they gat all tliey have, and also maintain it unto this day* 
For if any man, since that lime, either displeased the 
pope never so little, he immediately cursed him, and 
excommunicate him, and proclaimed him no right in- 
heritor, and that it was not lawful to hold of hini, and 
absolved his lords and subjects of their allegiance, and 
isent his blessing unto the Freiieli king, and remission of 
shis to go ami conquer bis land ; the pope and French 
king alway dividing the spoil between them : ihe bishops, 
and all that sened God for the belly, preaching the pope's 
might, how that he had power so to do, and ail things to 
bind and loose at his will ; wresting the Scriptures to serve 
for tiieir pnrj ose, corrupting all the laws^ both of God 
and nian^ to prove his goilhead witli&L 

^?P*.^*- Th en came pope Zacharias the First,iii whose time 

FirM. Hildericus was king of France, a man tliat governed his 

BUdcricui. realm (as it oft chanceth) by a deputy, (as persons preach) 



Owgofy 

tll6 pope 

came up by 
ibe FrencH- 

men, and 
hy Ibem lie 

continuietb 
his estate 
itU]. 



Tynpalk.] 



OF PRELATES. 



tiotie Pepiii^ a Lord of liisown^ and his sworn subjecL TLis 
Pepin seat an holy bishop to pope Zachurias^ that he should 
help lo make him king of France, and \\e woidd be liis de- 
fender in Italy ; (as the manner of scaled horses is, the one 
to claw the other) and Zacliarias answered, that he was more 
worthy to be king thai nded the realm and took the la- 
bours, than an idle shadow that went up and down, and 
did nought. And so upon that tlie lords of France, by 
the persuasions of the prelates, consented unto Pepin, 
and thrust down their right king unto whom they were 
sworn, and made a monk of him* And both the lords ^ 
and also Pepin, took dispensations for their oaths of our 
holy fathefj and were forsworn. Thus was our holy 
father the pope crept up into the consciences of men with 
his fali^ interpretation of binding and loosing, good eight 
hundred years ago. 



4&r 



PepiTi* 



The po|t« 
|)itt down 
the right 
Fr«tich 
kingr ai!)(l 
set np 
Pepin , 

The king 
of Franne 
WM made 
u modk. 



I 



f Then came pope Stephaiuis the Second, out of whose 
hands Kstulphus, king of Liombardy, would fain have 
scratched somewhat, for he thought that the holy fathers 
gathered too fast, and had already raked too much unto 
them. But the new king, Pepin of France, warned of 
Us duty and service promised, and mindful of old friend- 
ship, and hoping for pan of the prey, came to succour the 
pope. And when he had subdued the king of Lorn hardy, 
he gave unto our holy father, or rather to St* Peter, that 
hungry beggar, great provinces and countries in Lom- 
bardy and in Italy, with die Isle Corsica, and many great 
cities, of which some pertained unto tlie emperor, being 
tlien at Constantinople^ and yet the emperor had sent 
before unto kmg Pepin that he should not give of his 
towns unto the pope. But Pepin answered tliat he came 
for the same intent, and to enhance our holy tather. And 
our holy father received them^^ 

And thus tlie empire was divided in two parts : the 
pope and the French king parting the one half between 
them. And as the emperor decayed, the pope grew. 



Ptipe 

Sle^'eo Uic 
Second. 

Estulphus, 

kiDf qr; 

Lomb&rdy. 



How ihe 
pope wns 
tdvanccd* 





THE PRACTICE 



[TirMWAi^x, 



By wbiit 
Miihotnct 



he pope 
i become ft 

l«arth. 






And as tbt* pope grew, so ttie aect of Mabomet grew ; 
for t}.e emperor (half hh empire lost) was tiot able to 
defeud himself against tha iiitideliN. And the pope would 
buffer no help hence to come, for two causes ; one, lest the 
tmperor should recover bi^ empire again ; and another 
because the prelates of the Greeks would not submit 
tiiemselves unto his godhead ^ as the prelates of these 
Quarters of the world had done. 

A FT EH Pepin J reigned hia son the great Charlea», whom 
ive call Charlemaigner which knew no other God hut the 
|>ope^ nor any other \i ay to heaven than to do the pope 
bleasure. For the pope served him for two purposes ; 
pne^ to dispense with him for whatsoever mischief he did ; 
another, to be stabli^hed in tlie empire by his help, for 
^vithout his favour he w ist it would not be ; *o great a 
god %vas our holy father become already in those days. 

This pope Stephen in his latter days fell at variance 
Desiderius, king of l^ombardy, about the archbishop 
of Kavcnna, 



TVjpeAdrinn 
the First. 



The pope 
purposed to 
l)e emperor 
himself. 



A r-Trn Stephen succeeded Adrian tlir First, with whom 
DesideriuSy the king of Lombardy, would fain have made 
peace, but pope Adrian would not. And shortly upon that, 
the brother of this Charlemaigne, which reigned with him 
in half the dominion of France, died, whose wife, for 
fear of Charles, fled with her two sons unto Desiderius, 
king of Lombardy, for succour. Desiderius was glad of 
their coming, trusting by the means of these two children 
to obtain favour among many of the Frenchmen, and so 
to be able to resist Charles if he would meddle, and to 
bring Italy unto the right emperor again, and would have 
had that pope Adrian should have anointed them kings in 
their father's room. But Adrian refused that to do, (for 
he saw Charles mighty and meet for his purpose) and was 
as wily as Desiderius, and thought to keep out the right 
emperor, and be emperor of Rome himself, though he 



Ttndai^b.} 



OF PRELATES. 



400 



gave another the name for a season, till a more convenient 
time came. 

Then Desiderius warred upon the pope's jurisdiction. 
And Adrian sent to Charles. And Charles came with his 
army, and drave out Desiderius and his son, which son 
fled unto the right emperor to Constantinople. And 
Charles and the pope divided the kingdom of Lombardy 
between them. And Charles came to Rome. And the 
pope and he were sworn together, that whosoever should 
be enemy unto the one, should be enemy also unto the 
other. 

This Adrian gathered acouncil immediately of an hundred 
and fifty^three bishops, abbots, and religious persons, and 
gave unto Charles and his successors the empire of Rome, 
and ordained that the right and power to choose the pope 
ahould be his, and that no bishop should be consecrated 
till he had obtained of him both consent, and the orna- 
ments of a bishop also, (which they now buy of the pope) 
under pain of cursing, and to be delivered unto black 
Satan the devil, and loss of goods. (Dist. Ixiii.) 

And Leo the Third, which succeeded Adrian, confirmed 
the same, and crowned Charles emperor of Rome, for 
like service done unto him. And then there was ap- 
pointment made between the emperors of Constantinople 
and of Rome, and the places assigned how far the borders 
ot either empire should reach. And thus of one em- 
pire was made twain. And therefore the empire of Con- 
stantinople, for lack of help, was shortly after subdued of 
die Tnrtcs. 

The said Leo also called Charles die most Christian 
king, because of his good service : which tide die kings 
of France use unto diis day, though many of diem, be 
never so unchristened : as the last Leo called our king the 
defender of the faidi. And as this pope Clemens calleth 
the duke of Guelder the eldest son of the holy see of 
Rome, for no other virtue nor property that any man can 
know, save that he hath been all his life a pick-quarrel, 



Chnrles 
and the 
pope di- 
vided the 
kingdom of 
Lombardy. 

The pope 
gathered a 
council, 
and gave 
unto 

Charles the 
empire of 
Rome. 



Leo the 
Third, pope. 

Of one 
whole em- 
pire, the 
pope ir.ade 
two. 



Most 

Christian 

king. 



Defender 
of the 
faith. 

The eldest 
son of the 
holy seat 



410 



THE PRACTICE 



[Tyxdale* 



Who 18 a 
CbrisiiiiiD 

'Hie JifL' of 



nil IIIL-U iQ 
I lie ullffll* 

ci»cc of tlie 



PfAclice, 



The pope ta 

tin (I brcakiT 
of the 
bonds of 



Cbnrlcs a 

filthjr 

wliorc- 



and a cruel and utiitghteous bloodsheddur, a^ hhi father 
ihat sittetli in tliat lioly see is. So now above Beveti 
Imudred years to be a Christian king, ia lo tight for tJie 
pope, and most Climtiaii that most fighteih, and slayeth 
most tneii for \m pleasurti, 

This Cliarlea ^\ns a great conqueror ; that i^ to say, a 
great tyrant, and ovtTcarue many nations with the sw^ord : 
and as tiie Turk compeneth us unto his faith| §o he com- 
pelled tliem widi violence unto the faitli of Christ, say 
the stories. But (alas) Christ*s fiiith, where unto llie Holy 
Ghost only draweth men's hearts through preaching tlie 
word of trutii, and holy living according thereto, he knew 
not ; but unto the pope he subdued lliem, and unto tliis 
superstitious idolatry, wliich we use clean coatrary unto 
the 8cri[rture- 

Moreover, at the request and great desire of his motJier, 
he married die daughter of Desiderius, king of Lom- 
bardy ; but after one year, unto the great displeasure of 
his motlier, he put her away again ; but not without the 
false subtilty of the pope, thou may est be sure, neidier 
widiout his dispensation. For how could Charles have 
made for the pope's pleasure with Desidorius her father, 
and have thrust him out of his kingdom^ and banisheil his 
son for ever, dividing his kiugdom between him and the 
pope, as long as she had been his wife t 

And, therefore, the [sope, with his authority of binding 
and loosing, loosed the bonds of that matrimony, (as he 
hath many other since, and daily doth for like purposes) 
to the intent that he would with the sword of tlie French 
king put the kingdom of Lombardy, that was somewhat 
too nigh him, out of the way i by the reason of wht>se 
kings his fatherhood could not reign alone, nor assign or 
sell the bishoprics of Italy to whom he lusted, and at liis 
pleasure. 

He kept also four concubines, and lay vMi 
two of his own daughters thereto. And though he 
wist how that it was not unknown, yet his lusts 



rrNt>Ai*R.] 



OF PRELATES. 



411 



J greater tlmii great Chailee, he would iiotwete, nor yet 

refrain, 

I And bejotid hU tliatj die saving is^ that in his old age 
a wli(»rc had so bewitched him vvidi a ring and a peart in 
it| and 1 wot not wiiat imagery graven tlierein, that he 
went a i^alt after her as a dog after a bitch, and Uie 
dotehead waa beside himself, and wliote out of his mind : 
insoniuch that when the whore wqs dead, he could not 
depart from the dead corpse, but caused it to be embalmed, 
and to be carried with him whithersoever he went, so that all 
the world wondered at him ; till at the last his lords accom- 
bered wttli carrying her from place to place, and ashamed 
that so old a man, so great an f mjieror, and such a most 
Christian king, on whom and whose deeds every man's 
eves were set, should dote on a dead whore, took counsel 
what should be the cause. And it was concluded tlmt it 
must needs be by enchantment. Then they went unto the 
cofiin, and opened it, and souglit and found this ring on 
her iinger ; which one of the lords took oiF, and put it 
on his owii finger. When die ring was off, he commanded 
to bun her, regarding her no longer. Nevertheless, he 
cast a phantasy unto this lord, and began to dote as fast 

^^n him, so that he might never be out of sight ; but where 
mv Charles was, there must that lord also be ; and what 
Charles did, thai must he be privy unto : until that this 
lord perceiving that it came because of this enchanted ring, 
for very pain and tediousness, took and cast it into a well 
at Aeon, in Dutchland* And after that the ring was in 
the well, the emperor could never depart from the town ; 
but in the said place where the ring was cast, though it 
were a foul morass, yet he built a goodly monastery in the 
worship of our lady, and thither brought relics, from 
whence he could get tliem, and pardons to sanctify the 
place, and to make it more haunted. And there he lieth, 
and is a saint, as right is. For he did for Christ's vicar 
as much as the great Turk for Mahomet ; but to save his 
hohness, that he might be canonized for a saint, they feign 



\vUorc cur- 
rii^d will) 
]jim. 

This wns 
nn emperor 
for the 
popeV own 
mouUi' 



emperor. 




The pope 
made tbla 
Jei:Hfrot)s 
cjiipernr a 



tvi 



THE rilACriCE 



[T%'XDJL£. 



Ill hi^ life^ that hh abiding tJiere so coiitlituallj^ wsiaforthe 
hot-baths* sakeSi which be tliere. 



Levrb the 
mi] J. 



▼en tlie 



The pope 
fleeted And 

set up 
wUhuiit tUc 
ass^ot of 
ttie em- 
pcror. 



ri>pc Pns- 



TliC pope, 
Imw he 



Tlws pope 
Bitteib nat 
by lliu eoj- 
ptiror. 



A FT EH Chaileniaigtitv Lewis the iniJd was emperor, 
which was a very imtient man, (anotlier Phocas^ and an- 
otJier |.jrey for the pope) and so meek and soft, that scarcely 
lie could be augry at any tiling at alL When our holy 
fathers had seen his water, and a^ied what complexion 
he was, they chose Stephen the Fourth, of that name, pope, 
witiiout his knowledge, and bad him neither good morrow, 
HOT good even, nor once God speed about the matter, 
ag^nst tlieir own grant unto his father for his good service. 
And hiH softness was yet somewhat displeased therewith, 
inasmuch as the election of the pope pertained unto liis 
right. But the pope sent ambassadors, and wrote all the 
excuses tliat be could, and came after himself to France 
to him, and peaced him, and crowned him there emperor, 
and passed the time a season with him, and they became 
very familiar togellier. 

After that tliej chose PaschaHs pope of the same 
manner ; whicEi Paschalis sent immediately legates upto the 
em|>eror soft J^wis, excusing himself, and saying that it 
was not his fault, but that tlie clergy and the common 
people had drawn him thereto with violence against his 
will. Then the emperor was content for tliat onc^^ and 
bad they should no more do so, but that the old ordt nance 
ought to be kept* The softness of this Lewis did liim 
much care* For he was after prisoned of his own son, 
with help of pope Gregory the Fourth, 

After this man's days, die popes never regarded the 
emperors, nor did the clergy of Rome sue any more to 
the emperor, either for the election or confirmation of the 
pope. Moreover, after this Lewis there was never em- 
peror in Christendom of any power, or able of his own 
might to correct any pope ; neither was there any king 
that could correct the outrageous vices of the spiritu- 
alty of his own realm after this lime* For this Lewis 



Ttkdalb.] of prelates. 4ia 

left three sons, among which he divided the realm of 
France and all Dutchland : which same, for pride and 
disdain that one should have more than another, fell to- 
gether (as we say) by the ears, each destroying other's 
power, so that France was afterward of no might to do 
any great thing. And dien the pope reigned in Italy 
akme, without care of any emperor : insomuch that Ni- Alone. 
diolas the First decreed that no secular prince or emperor Pope Ni- 
should have ought to do, or be at the councils of the pj®*" 
ckrgy. 

And after that Adrian the Second was chosen pope, p^^p^ 
the emperor's deputy being in Rome, and not once spoke ^"^ ^**® 
to of the matter. 

And when die emperor's ambassadors disdained, they 

answered. Who can resist die rage of the people ? and 

prayed them to be content, and to salute him as pope. 

And Adrian the Third decreed that they should not abide Pope 

or tarry for the emperor's confirmation or authority in xhird? 

choosing the pope, and tliat die pope only should call a 

general council, and not the emperor ; or if the emperor 

would presume that to do, the council should be of none 

effect, though all die prelates of Chistendom were there, 

and though whatsoever diey did were but God's word. 

So mighty was the beast now waxed when he once began 

to reign alone. And from this time hitherto perished the The virtue 

power of the emperors and the virtue of the popes, saith and poSer^ 

Platina, in the life of popes. For since that time, as there ^^ ^**« «™- 

i. • 1 1 /. peror pe • 

was none emperor of nught, so was there no pope of any rUhed to- 

virtue. «^^^^'' 

After this Lewis, the empire of France, and of all 

Dutchland, was divided between his three sons ; which, as 

I said, fought one with another, and destroyed the strength 

of the empire of France. And from that time to this, j^^ p^p^, 

which is above seven hundred years, thou shalt read of few *»*^c been 

popes that have not led their lives in bloodshedding, inso- shedders 

much that if thou consider the stories well, thou shalt ^^^^J^^ 
. , ' , hnndred 

easily perceive that there hath been slam about their cause years. 



414 



THE PRACTICE 



[Tyndalr. 



All Christ- 
cntlom hath 
heou troij ' 
b!ed wiih 
the jK>pes* 



Girths. 



The s|jiri tu- 
alty obeyed 
ta bim uint 
p-at the vic- 
tory, how 
vicked flo- 
evtrhe WftB* 

of abbiea. 

Shrtniiig^ 
of iminttt. 



Ikr above forty hundred thauttand men ; beside that there 
halb been but few princes in CbriiitenduiD tiiat hath not 
been busied and cumbered a great part of his life about 
tlieir matter. Either in wars, begun at tiieir setting un j 
either in cea^^ing schisms or division that hatli been among 
the clergy, who should be pope ; or striving of bisbopSj 
who should be greatest, as between the bishop of York 
and Canterbury in England, and between the bishops of 
England and Wales ; whereof all tlie cbronieles be full ; 
or in reforming friars or monks, or in slaying them that 
uttered their false hyj^ioerisy with God's word* 

When the emperor was down, and no man in Christen- 
dom of any power to be feared, then every^ nation fell 
upon other, and all lands were at variance between them- 
selves. And then as the Danes came into England, and 
vexed the Englishmen, and dwelt there in spile of their 
hearts, even so came strange nations whose names were 
scarce heard of before in Uiese quarters; (as tlic Vandals, 
Huns, and Goths,) and ran throughout all Christendom 
by hundred thousands together, and subdued the lands 
and dwelt therein maugre tJie inhabitors j as thou mayest 
see in Butchland, how divers nations are inclosed in the 
midst of the land, of a strange tongue which no DutchmeQ 
understand ; and that rule continued well eight or iiine 
score, or two hundred yeani. And in all this season^ 
whosoever won the mastery, him the spiritualty received, 
and liim they crowned king, and to him they clave. And 
whatsoever any tyrant had robbed all his life, that, or the 
most part thereof, must he deal among them at his death 
for fear of purgatory. The spiritualty all Uiat season 
preached tlie pope mightily, built abbies for recreation 
and quiebiess, shrining them alway for saints which pur- 
chased them privileges, or fought for their liberties, or 
disputed for tlie pope's power, howsoever they lived, (but 
after fifty years, when their lives were forgotten,) and if any 
resisted tliem whatsoever mischief diey went about, him 
they noted in the chronicles as a cruel tyrant: yea and 



TnnuLB.J 



OF PRELATES. 



415 



whatsoever misfortune chanced any of his posterity after 

him, that they noted also, as though God had plagued 

them, because their forefather was disobedient unto holy Hiis was 

diurch; and ever put the stories that uttered their wicked- Jj^^^'f^igg 

ness out of the way, and gathered relics from whence prophets 

they could get them, and feigned mmicles, and gave thcchu^h 

themselves only unto poetry, and shut up the Scripture : 

so that this was die very time of which Christ speaketh 

Matt xxiv. in which false prophets should arise, and 

shew miracles and wonders, to deceive die very elect, if it 

bad been possible. 



Finally in this busy world, the kings of Lombardy 
gat a little might and came up again, and were divers 
times emperors, though of no great might. And one 
Beringarius, king of Lombardy, began to meddle with our 
holy Other's business. Wherefore the pope fled unto Otho 
king of the Saxons, which by that time had gotten might, 
and brought him into Italy against Beringarium, which 
Otho overcame Beringarium, and was made emperor for his 
labour, and thus came the empire first unto Dutchland. 

And Otho received the empire of one pope John (say 
they) with this oadi : I Otho do promise and swear unto 
die lord John, by the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost, and by this wood of the cross that maketli living, 
and by these relics of saints, that if I come to Rome, widi 
God's help, I will exalt the holy church of Rome, and 
the governor of die same unto my power. Neither shalt 
diou lose life nor members, or that honour that thou hast 
by my will, counsel, consent, or setting a work. More* 
over, I will make in Rome no constitution or ordinance of 
any thing that pertaineth unto thee, or unto the Romans, 
without thy counsel. And whatsoever of the lands of St. 
Peter cometh unto our hands, I will deliver it diee. And 
unto whosoever I shall commit the rule of Italy, I will 
make him swear that he shall help thee to defend the lands 
of St* Peter unto his power. 



Berioga- 
rius. 

Otho. 



Pope Ji)hn 
tbe xiith. 

The oath of 
the empe- 
ror made to 
the pope. 



Note here 
the dissi- 
mulation of 
the pope, 
in calling 
his posses- 
sions St. 
Peter's pos- 
sessions. 



416 



THE PRACTICE 



tTvNUALR. 



Pope Gre- 

fory the 



Tlie elec- 
tion of the 
emperor 
appertnia- 
etli to tlie 
lardi of 
Germany. 



And Gregory the Fifth (when they had got at tlie last 
that which they long gaped for) made this ordinance of 
choosing the eniperor, to stahUsh it withal : that six lords 
of Almany, three of the spirit ualtyj and three of the tem- 
porally, withtlie king of Bohemia the seventh^ to h«the odd 
man, and umpire should choose him for ever, and send 
him to the pope to receive his oatii, and to be cro\i7ied^ 
Nevertlieless the pope to keep the emperor afar offj !*end- 
eth him his coronation home to him oftttmes, much lever 
than that he should come any nearer, as a meek spirited 
man, that had lever live solitary and alone than have his 
holiness seen. 



A PROPER SIMILITUOE TO DESCRIBE OUR 
HOLY FATHER. 



Tliff Wy 
eth. 



Tti* mjiii- 

l!»<» pO|HJ 

did Kprinf 
up to UU 

lliorlty. 




^ND to see how our holy father came up^ mark the en- 
sample of an ivy tree ; first it springeth out of 
the earth, and then awhile creepeth along by tlie ground 
till it findeth a great tree ; then it joineth itself beneatli 
alow unto the body of the tree, and creepeth up a little 
and a little fair and softly < And at the beginning while it 
is yet thin and small, that the burthen is not perceived^ it 
seemeth glorious to garnish the tree in the winter, and to 
bear off the tempests of the weather* But in tJie mean 
season it thrusteth roots into the bark of the tree to hold 
fast withal, and cease th not to climb up till it be at the 
top and above all. And then it sendethhis branches along 
by the branches of the tree, and overgrowetb all, and 
waxeth great, heavy, and thick ; and sucketh the moisture 
so sore out of the tree and his branches, that it choaketh 
and stifleth them. And then the foul stinking ivy waxeth 
mighty in the stnnrp of the tree, and be come th a seat and 



' TVXWAI.K.] 



OF PRELATES, 



417 



la neat for all unclean birds, and for blind owls which bawk 



the dark J hi id dare not ^ 



at the liglit. 



I 

I 



¥ 



come 

Even so the bishop of Rome, now called pope> at the 
beginning crope along upon the earthy and every man trod 
upon him in tins world. But as soon a^ there came a 
Chri^Htian emperor, be joined himself unto his feet and 
kissed theuj, and crope up a little with begging, now this 
privile^j now that; now this city ^ now that; to tind poor 
people withal, and the necensarv ministers of God^s word. 
And he etUitled the eniperor with choo^jing the pope and 
other bishops, and promoteil in the spiritualty, uot whom 
virtue and learnhig, but whom the favour of great men 
commendeUi; to (latter, to get friends, and defenders 
witliuL 

And the alms of the congregation which was the food 
and patrimony of the poor and necessary preachers, that 
he called St. Peter's patrimony, St, Peter's rents, St, 
Peter's lands, St. Peter's right ; to cast a vain fear, and 
nn heathenish superstitiousness into the hearts of men, 
that no man should dare meddle with whatsoevet* came 
once into their hands for fear of St. Peter, though they 
ministered it never ski evil ; and that tbey which should 
think it none alms to give them any more (because they 
had too much already) should yet give St, Peter somewhat 
(as Nebucliadnexzar gave bis god Baal) to purchase an 
advocate ami an intercessor of St. Peter^ and that St 
Peter should at the first knock let them in. 

And thus, with flattering and feigning, and vain super- 
stition, under the name of St* Peter, he crept up and 
fastened his roots in the heait of tlie emperor, and with his 
sword, climbed up above all his fellowships, and brought 
them under his feet. And as he subdued them witli the 
emperor's sw'ord, even so by subtitty and help of them 
(after that they were sworn faithful) lie climbed above the 
emperor, and subdued him also, and made stoop unto his 
fcet, and kiss them another while. Yea, pope Coelestinus 
crowned tlie empemr Henry the fifth, holding the crown 



Tlie € boos- 
ing uf Tbe 
pope and 
ttil bisliops 
pertaini^d 
untu iUc 
era pf TOT 
and kln|^t 

The fllltl!! 

given iinta 
I be pnor 
is betomo 
St. Tctcr'i 
l>»lriinony. 



Dftn. %W* 



Tlip pope 
6 rat ^nt 
above all 
tLiL- bi>liop9» 
nml tlivn 
above tbe 
eniperur. 



O Lticifei-. 



41S 



THE PRACTICE 



[Tyndale, 



Note tbb 

RDd mborni- 
Dabkprtde* 



mniic by 
tbc pope. 



The pof'C 
cretticib 

but ^liiivc- 
lings into 

digaUks, 



Qttalis p»- 
ter, tnljii 
filuii^good 

children. 



The popi^'i 
order com- 
p«red iv'lth 

CUrtst*». 



Cbrist and 
the pope 
eorupnccd 
tiigctbi^r. 



between his feet. And when he bad put the crown 
oil, he sniolu jt off willi his feet again^ saving : tlial 
he had might to make emperor^^ aud put them down 
again. 

And he made n constitution that no layman should 
meddfc with their matters , nor be in their councils , or 
wit what they did ; and that the pope only should call tlie 
council^ and tlie empire should bat defend the poj^e, pro* 
vided alway that the council should be in one of tlie 
pope's towns, anil where the pope's power w as greater than 
the emperor*s ; then under a j>retcnce of coiideiuning some 
heresy^ he called a general council, where he made one 
a patriarchy another cardinal, another legate^ another pri- 
mate, anotiier archbishop, another bishop, another dean, 
another archdeacon, and so forth, as we now see. 

And as the pope played with the emperor, »o did his 
branches, and his members the bishops, play in every king- 
dom, dukedom, and lordship ; insomuch, that the very 
heirs of them, by whom they came up, hold now their 
lands of them^ and take them for their chief lordB, And 
as the en»peror is sworn to the pope, even so every king is 
sworn to the bishops and prelates of his realm ; and tliey 
are tlte chiefest in all parliaments^ yea, they and their 
money, and they that be sworn to them, and come up by 
them, rule altogether. 

And thus the pope^ the father of all hypocrites, hath 
w itii falsehood and guile perverted the order of tlie world, 
and ttirned the roots of the trees upward, and hath put 
down the kingdom of Christ, and set up the kingdom of 
the devil, whose vicar he is, anil hath put down the minis- 
ters of Christ, and huth set up the ministers of Satan, dis- 
guised yet in names and g&rmenis like unto the angels of 
light, and ministers of righteousness. For Christ's king- 
dom is not of the world; (John xviii.) and the pope's 
kingdom is all the world. 

And Christ is neither judp;e nor divider in this world. 
(Luke xii.) Bnl the pope judgeth and divided] all the 



Ttndale.] of prelates. 419 

world, and taketh the empire and all kingdoms, and giveth 
them to whom he lusteth. 

Christ saith, (Matt, v.) Blessed are the poor in spirit: 
flo that the first step in the kingdom of Christ is humble- 
ness, or humility, that thou canst find in thine heart to do 
service unto all men, and to suffer that all men tread thee. 

The pope saith^ Blessed be the proud and high minded, 
that can climb and subdue all under them, and maintain 
dbeir ri^t, and such as will suffer of no man. So that he 
which was yesterday taken from the dunghill and promoted 
this day by his prince, shall to-morrow, for the pope's plea- 
sure, curse him, and excommunicate him, and interdict 
his realm. 

Christ saith. Blessed be the meek, or soft, that be 
harmless as doves. 

The pope blesseth them that can set all the world toge- 
ther by the ears, and fight, and slay manfully for his sake, 
that he may come hot from bloodshedding to a bishopric, 
as our cardinal did, and as St. Thomas of Canterbury did, 
which was made bishop in the field, in complete harness 
OB his horseback, and his spear bloody in his hand. 

Christ hath neither holes for foxes, nor nests for birds, 
nor yet whereon to lay his head, nor promised ought in 
this world unto his disciples, nor took any to his disciple 
but him that had forsaken all. 

The ivytree the pope hath under his roots throughout 
all Christendom, in every village, holes fof foxes, and 
nests for unclean birds in all his branches, and promiseth 
unto hb disciples all the promotions of the world. 

The nearer unto Christ a man cometh, the lower he Christ 
must descend, and the poorer he must wax : but the nearer ^"°?f *^ * 

' *^ , ' . man Idw, 

unto the pope ye come, the higher ye must climb, and the but the 
more riches ye must gather whencesoever ye can get them, S^^n^iijA, 
to pay for your bulls, and to purchase a glorious name 
and licence, to wear a mitre, and a cross, and a pall, and 
goodly ornaments. 

2 E 2 



4^ THE raAeriOB CTnM&lg 

HOW THE POPE RECEH'^TH HIS KINGDOM OF 
THE DEVIL, AND HOW HE DISTRIBUTETH IT 
AGAIN, 



Hiefcf^ gHORTLYi the kingdoniB of the earth and the glory of 
ithridMi '^^"*' which Christ refused, (Malt- iv.) did the devil 

wtnA ^Uf' proffer unto the pope ; and he ini mediately fell from Clirist 
llw d^. ^^^ worshipped the devil, and received them. For by 
fabehood {as he niaintaineth them) came he thereto, and 
by falsehood do all his disciples come thereto. Who of 
an hundred one is pope, bishop, or any great prelate, but 
either by necromancy, or simony, or waiting on great 
men's pkasures, and with corrupting of God's word, and 
fashioning it after their lusts ? 
2*J2J And the pope, after he had received the kingdom of the 

«A iii Ih- world of the devil, and was become tlie devirs vicar, took 
to^kiiif- up ii^ lii^e manner all Christendom on high, and brought 
them from the meekness of Christ unto the high hill of 
the pride of Lucifer, and shewed them all the kingdomst 
of Uie earth, saying: Fall down and worship me, and I 
will give you these. Unto the spiritualty he saith : Fall 
from Christ, and preach me, and take thou that cardinal- 
ship, thou that bishoprick, thou that abbotship, and so 
forth ; thou as many benefices as thou wilt, and a dispen- 
sation for what thou wilt. And to monks, and fiiars, in 
like manner, take thou that hole, and thou that 'nest, with 
what privileges ye will desire, and dispensations of your 
rules, if ye will preach me. 

And unto the temporally, he saith, first to the em- 
peror : If thou wilt fall down and kiss my feet, and swear to 
hold of me, and to defend me, 1 give thee the empire. 

And to all kings, in like manner, if they will swear to 
defend his liberties, and to hold of him, he crowneth them. 
And even so all temporal lords from the highest unto the 
lowest, and all officers, and all manner of subjects, if they 





VSfpAl/K,] 



OF PRELATES. 



4S1 



will enjoy Jaads^ renH, offices^ gooda, and tlieir very lives, 
thev mii^t run the same way. 

The very wliores (God's honour unregarded) as long as 
they despise not him and liis ordinances^ they slndl nest in 

■lib rent^y and among his prelates, And the thieves and 
murderers shall have dens in his saiictnarie!^, whatsoever 
they do againsl God, so long as they hang on htm. 

^m Tlie apostles chose priests to preach Christ only, alt 
other things laid apart, and chose none hut learned and 
virtuous. 

B 'flje pope shaveth wljosoever cometh, lever out of the 
»teM?i, dian from study ; and when they be sworn ^ he 
sendeth them lUito all great men's houses to preach his 
godhead, to be stewards, surveyers, receivers, and coiiiisel- 
tora of all manner of mischief ; to corrupt wife, daughter, 
and maid, and to betray their own master, as oft as tt 
needeth, to promote their falsehood withal. For thereto 
are they sworn together* And when they have done all 
mischief, there shall no man wot whence it cometh. 

The apostles chose deacons to miniater tlie alms to the 
rich, unto the poor* And to help the deacons, they chosie 
widows of sixty years old, holy, and destitute of friends to 
tend the sick. And the pope instead of such widows, 
makelh whosoever cometh, ^vh ether she be young or old, 
but none save them that be rich and able to pay twenty, 
Uiirty, or forty pound, for their profession, to whom for as 
much more he will give a dispensation on the morrow to 
marry again. And instead of such deacons ^ he maketh 
both deacons and sub-deacons, which do nothing at all, but 
are vain names without office, except it be that on some 
holy day, instead of ministering the gocds of the church 
nnio the poor, they sing au epistle or gospel, to beg more 
from the poor, 

And as his deacons minister the goods of the church 
mito the poor, even so do his priests preach Christ'H 
gospel unto the Hock. 
• And the alms that was given to the sustetitation of the 



order cnm* 
pATtd with 

the order 
of thG 
apoatles^ 

The po|jC*» 
prit'&t3* 



llie po|)C*i 
wliJowi. 



The pope's 
dencou^. 



«4« 



THE FliACTICE 



[Xveeoyiu&i 



Howtlie 

popedivid* 

ecbtlie 



plet 



iSS: 



Monkg 
made mi- 
Distera to 
the poor. 



Monks rob 
the poor. 



pocH^, vrhicli thou shall read in stories that it was in 
some cities above tweiti\, thirty^ aud fort), yea, au 
kundred thotnand pound, and all the lands ^ven for ihe 
same purpose, ikity have stolen from tltem, and have di^ 
vided it limoiig tfaeni^elvea. And therewith did they at the 
beginniiig cornipl tlie great men of the world | and elimb 
up la tUi heif^t :where tliey now be. And for th^t they 
hrtlFe itmed ainoiig themselves tliis eight hundred years. 
And to linlttntliiii tJiat which they have fabely gotten, hath 
the pope stirred up by a sword of war in all Cluistetidoin 
this eight hundlped year^ and hath taken peace clean cmt 
of the world. 

When die bishops, priests, and deacons were fallen, 
and had received of the pope the kingdom that pertained 
ttfllo the poor people^ and had robbed tliem and parted 
Aot patrimony among them»elvei, then sprang Uie orders 
of moidu. WhoBe profession was, to abstain from flesh 
ill their live#> to wear vile raiment, to eat but once in the 
day, and thai but butter, cheese, ^ggSj ^its, roots, and 
such dniii that were not costly, and might every where 
be fKUid. And' they wrote books, and wrought divere 
Aang* to get Iheir hving witbaU When the laymen saw 
that the priests were fallen into such covetousness, and that 
the monks were so holy, they thought, These be meet 
men to minister our alms unto the poor people. For 
their profession is so holy that they cannot deceive us as 
the priests do : and made the monks tutors and ministers 
unto the poor, and gave great lands and riches into their 
hands, to deal it unto the poor. When the monks saw 
such abundance, they fell after the ensample of the priests, 
and took dispensations of the pope for their rules, and 
strait profession, which now is as wide as their cowls, and 
divided all among them and robbed the poor once more. 
And out of the abbies took he the most part of bishoprics 
and cathedral churches, and the most part of all the lands 
he hath, besides that there remain yet so many mighty 
abbies and nunneries thereto. 



TvNDALK.] OF PRELATES. 425 

As soon as the monks were fallen, then sprang these Begging 
bulging friars out of hell, the last kind of caterpillars, in a '^^^' 
more vile apparel, and a more strait religion, that . (if 
blight of relief were left among the laymen for the poor 
peojde) these horseleeches might suck that also. Which 
dfoiie-foees, as soon as they had learned their craft, and 
had built them goodly and costly nests ; and their limiters 
had divided all countries among them to beg in ; and had 
pvepanMl livings of a certainty, though with begging; then 
tbqr also took dispensations of the pope for to live as 
largely, and as lewdly as the monks. 

And yet unto the laymen, whom they have thus falsely xhe charge 

robbed, and from which they have divided themselves, ofihclay- 

, people. 

and made them a several kingdom among themselves, they 

leave the paying of toll, custom, and tribute, (for unto 

all die charges of the realms will they not pay one 

mite) and the finding of all the poor, the finding of 

sdM^ars for the most part, the finding of these foresaid 

horse-leeches and caterpillars, the begging friars, the 

repairing of the high-ways and bridges, the building and 

rqparati<nis of their abbies and cathedral churches, chapeb, 

ooUeges ; for which they send out their pardons daily by 

heaps, and gather a thousand pounds for every hundred 

Umt they bestow truly. 

If the lay-people have war, or whatsoever charge it be, 
they will not bear a mite. If the Avar be theirs, (as the 
one part almost of all war is to defend them) they will 
with &lsehood make them bear the greatest part ; besides 
duit diey must leave their wives and children, and go fight 
for them, and lose their lives. And likewise in all their 
charges they have a cast to poll the lay-people. The 
Scots cast down a castle of the bishop of Durham's, 
on the Scottish bank called Noram castle. And he gat 
a pardon from Rome for the building of it again, where- 
with I doubt not but he gat for every penny . that he 
bestowed three. 

And what do they with their store, that they have in so 



4^ 

How the 

l]i(»tOMr 

their trcA- 



THE PRACTfCE 



rr¥?CDALfc. ■ 



great plenty everr where ; so that the very begging frtar^, in 
^iiort space, to make a cardinal or a pope of their sect^ or 
to do what feat it were for theii" profit, %vou!d not stick to 
bring above a king' t^ ransom ? Verily, make pjiodly ptaces 
and parks of pleasure, and gay shrines, and painted po«ts^ 
and purchase pardons, wherewith they yet Btill poll, and 
pluck away that little wherewith the poorj which perish for 
need, and fall into great inconveniences , might be Bome- 
w^hat ho] pen and relieved. And lay up in store to have 
alw ay to pay for the defending of their faith, and for to 
oppress the truth, 

* 



HOW THE POPE MADE HIM A LAW, AND WHY. 



The pope 

maketb 

Jaws. 

The pope 
liHth feigu- 
ed the gift 
of Constan- 
tine. 



^FTER that the pope witli tyranny was climbed above 
his brethren, and had made all the spiritualty his jsub- 
jects, and had made of them and hiin a several king- 
dom atnong themselves, and had separated ihem from the 
lay in all things, and had got privileges, that whatsoever 
they did no man should meddle with them ; and after also 
he had received the kingdoms of the earth of Satan, and 
was become his vicar to distribute them ; and after that 
the emperor was fallen in like manner at his feet, and had 
worshipped him as god, to receive his empireof him ; and 
all kings had done likewise to be anointed of him, and 
to be crowned of him ; and after that the world, botii 
great and small, had submitted themselves to receive the 
beast's badge ; then, because that Christ's doctrine was 
contrary unto all such kingdoms, and therefore had no 
law therein how to rule it ; he went and made him a 
several law of his own making, which passed in cruelty 
and tyranny the laws of all heathen princes. 

And in his law he thrust in feigned gifts of old .em- 
perors that were out of memory, saying that the emperor 
Constsmtinus had given up the empire of Rome unto 



TvNDALis.] OF PRELATES. 4«5 

St. Silvester, which is proved a false lie, for divers causes : vt^hat sub- 
one, that St. Silvester being so holy a man as he was, t>*tyt^« 

,' ... ,. pop« uscth 

would not have received it contrary to his master s com- to stablish 

mandments and doctrine : another, that the emperors 5om "^ 
reigned in Rome many years after, and all bishops sued 
unto^ the emperor, and not to the. pope, which was but 
biskop of Rome only^' and not called Father of fathers. 
Moreover, that no authentic story maketh mention that 
any emperor ^aye them their patrimony, but that Pepin, 
which fidsely'and with strength invaded Ae empire, gave 
.it unto him. Then put he in the grant of Phocas ; then 
the gift of Pepin confirmed by the great Charles ; then a 
feigned release of the election of the pope given up again 
unto pope Paschal by the emperor Lewis. For they them- 
selves had granted unto Charlemagne, and his successors 
for ever, the election or denomination of the pope and 
bishops, to flatter him withal, and to make him a faithful 
defender, and that in a general council which (as they say) 
cannot err. Nevertheless, pope Paschal, though he be- 
lieved the council could not err, yet he thought them some- 
what over-seen to make so long a grant, and therefore he 
purchased a release of gentle Lewis, as they pretend. 
But verily, it is more likely that they feigned that grant 
to excuse their tyranny, after they had taken the election 
into their hands again with violence, when the emperors 
were weak, and not able to resist them ; as they feigned 
the gift of Constantine, after they had invaded the em- 
pire with subtilty and falsehood. And, last of all, they 
brought in the oath of Otho, with the order that now is 
use^^ to choose the emperor. 



-Jifi 



THE PUACTICE 



[rvNUA 1^, 



HOW THE POPE CORRUPl^TH THE SCHlPrURE, 
AND WHY. 



The pope 
carruptetb 
the Scrip' 
tnre* Knd 



Peter (sairh 
thi^ pop*) 
WAS the 
licarl of 
Christ's 
church* 



All miniS' 
UTB hure as 

great a 
cliargc 

them of 
Godu 
Peter bad. 



Peu?r 

prcaclied, 
but the 

preached 



IV/TOREOVERj lest these liis lies should be spied, aiid 
lest haply tfie emperors following might savj Our 
predecessors had iiu power to bind us, nor to minish our 
might ;/mnd lest kings following should say after the sanie 
nianiier, that the sword, and full power to punii^h evil- 
doers indifferently^ is given of God to every king for his 
time, and therefore that tlieir predecessor could not bind 
them contrary unto die ordinance of God ; but rather diat 
it was unto their damnation to make such grants, and 
that they did not execute their office. And, therefore, the 
foul and misshapen monster gat him to llie Scripttire, 
and corrupted it w ith false expositions ; to prove that such 
authority w as given him of God, and challenged it by the 
autliority of Peter ; saying that Peter was the head of 
Christ's church, and that Christ had made him lord over 
the apostles, his fellows, in tliat he bade him feed his 
sheep and lambs : John the last, as who should say that 
Paul, which came long after, wa;* not commanded to feed 
as specialty as Peter, which yet would take none autliority 
over the bodies, or over the faiths of them whtcb he fed, 
but was their servant, for Christ's sake, Christ ever the loij 
and head ; and as though the other apostles were not like- 
wise as sp€^ci%lly commanded as Peter ; and as though we 
now, and all that hereafter shall love Christ, were not coin- 
man tied to feed Christ^s flock, ever}- man in his measur^i 
as well as Peter ! Are not we commanded to love our 
neighbours as ourselves as well as Peter ? Why then aie 
we not commanded to care for his flock as well as Peter ? 
Moreover, if to feed Christ's sheep is to be greatest, (as 
no doubt to feed Christ's flock is to be great, and nio»t to 
feed, is to be greatest : in which office, though Peter was 



Tyndalk.] of PUELATES. 4'27 

great, yet Paul was greater) how cometli it that the pope 
by that authority challengeth to be greatest, and yet this 
eight hundred years feedeth not at all ; but poisoneth 
their pasture with the venomous leaven of his traditions, 
and with wresting the text unto a contrary sense ? 

Then came he to this text, (Matt, xvi.) Thou art 
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my congregation 
or church. Lo, saith antichrist, tlie carnal beast, Peter 
is the rock whereon the church of Christ is built, and I am 
hifl succesaor, and therefore the head of Christ's church. 
WheD Christ meant by the rock the confession that Peter 
bad confessed, saying. Thou art. Christ, the son of the 
living God, which art come into this world. This faith Pi^th It 
is the rock whereon Christ's church is built. For who is ^f ^^^ 

wbereoQ 
of Christ's church, but he only that believeth that Christ Christ's 

is God's son, come into this world to save sinners ? This ^[^^ ** 

feith is it against which hell-gates cannot prevail. This 

feith is it which saveth the congregation of Christ, and 

not Peter. 

Then he goeth forth unto that which followeth : Unto 
thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and 
whatsoever thou bindest in earth, it shall be bound in 
heaven, &c. Lo, saith he, in that he saith whatsoever Bindinf 
diou bindest in earth, he excepteth nothing, therefore, I ^d loos- 
may make laws, and bind both king and emperor. When is to be uo- 
Cbist, as he had no worldly kingdom, even so he spake ^*"*<^* 
of no woridly binding, but of binding of sinners. Christ The kejrs. 
gave his disciples the key of the knowledge of the law of 
God, to bind all sinners ; and the key of the promises, 
to loose all that repent, and to let them in to the mercy 
that is laid up for us in Christ. 

Then cometh he unto another text, which Christ re- 
hearseth, (Matthew last) saying. All power is given me 
in heaven and earth ; go ye, therefore, and teach all na- 
tions, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost ; teaching them to keep all 
that I commanded you : and behold, I am with you unto 



4«d 

Behold 
here aotl- 
cbrlsi, lu^w 
he wrv?alet!i 
Uie Scrip- 
tures. 



power is to 
save sin 



Of tblJ! 

luautior 
judgetb be 
wUb nU 
texU. 



Attbt 
nuWtntig of 
€hffi9i^ the 
offBTtng of 

Attd rcr*- 



ceased ; 
Tor CbriM 
offered 
hiuiaelf 
once for 
all. 

Ckritt 
K«irc all bis 

like initho- 




THE PUACTILE 



[IVkdalk. 



the world's end. Lo^ saitli the pope, Christ batli all 
power ill 1iea%eii and earth without eKception^ and 1 am 
Christ*s vicar ; wherefore^ all power i* mine, and I am 
ab^jve all kmgs and emjierors in temporal jiirisdtction, 
and they but my servants, to kbs not my feet only, bm 
my . N * aUo, if 1 list not to have them stoop so low* When 
Christ I as 1 said, because he had no temporal kingdom , 
even ao he meant of no temporal power ; but of power to 
save sinnei-s, wlncli the pro«%ss of the text declareth by 
that he suith^ Go ye^ therefore^ and teach and baptize ; 
that isp preach this power unto all nations, and wash off 
their sins, through faith in the promises made in my blood* 

Then he cometh unto another text, (Heb. vii.) which 
is^ The priesthood being translated, tlie law must neeiU 
be translated also* Now, saith tlie pope, "^Oie priesthood 
is translated unto me, wherefore it pertainetli unto tne to 
make laws, and to bind every man. And the Epistle 
uieaneth no such things but proveth evidently tliat Use 
ceremonies of Moses must dease. For the priests *>f the 
Old Testament must needs have been of the tribe of Levi, 
fts Aaron was, whose duty for ever was the offering of 
sacrifices J wherefore, wlien that priesthood ceased, tlie 
sacrifices and ceremonies ceased also. Now that priest- 
hood ceased in Christ, which was a priest of the order of 
Melchizedec, and not of the order of Aaron ; for then he 
must have been of the tribe of Levi, and that he was hqI, 
but of the tribe of Judah, and of the seed of David ; 
wherefore they tliat are under Christ's priesthood are 
under no sacriiices or ceremonies. And of this manner 
juggle they with all the Scripture ; which falsehood, lest 
the laymen should perceive with reading tlie process of 
the text, is all their fear, whatsoever they pretend. 

Moreover, liiat thou mayest perceive the pope's false* 
hood, tnark^ Christ said unto Peter, I will give, and not 
I give ; neiilier said he, I will give unto thee only, Theie- 
fore, look in the xxth chapter of John, where he gave 
them the keys after his resurrection, and thou shah see he 



Tyndale.] of prelates. 439 

gave .them unto all indifrereutly, laying, As my Father 
s^t me, so send I you. Whither seat he them ? Unto 
all the worlds and unto all nations. What to do ? To 
preach the law, that the people might repent, and the 
promises, that they might believe in Christ, for the re- 
mission of sins, saying, Receive the Holy Ghost : who- 
aoever's sin ye forgive, they shall be forgiven. By which 
Holy Ghost, he gave them understanding of the Scrip- 
ture, and of all that they should preach : as thou mayest 
see, Luke last, where he opened their wits to under- 
stand the Scripture, and said. That repentance and for- 
giveness of sins must be preached, in his name, to all 
nations, and that they were witnesses to preach it. Where- To bind 
by diou seest, that to bind and to loose, is but to preach 2[*^'^^^^ 
and to tell the people their faults, and to preach mercy in preach. 
Christ, to all that repent. 

And irfien he saith, All power is given me, he saith not, Christ sent 
Go thou, Peter, and preach : but saith unto all indif- aposUw," 
ferently. Go ye, and preach this power given me of my »nd not 
Father, .to save all that repent, and to damn them that aloue. 
rq>ent not, but follow the lusts of their flesh, with full 
dmre to live beastly, being enemies unto the law of God. 

And (Matt, xviii.) Peter asked Chiist how oft he Note. 
should forgive his brethren, whether seven times ? And 
Christ said. Seventy times seven times. As who should 
say. As oft as he repenteth, and asketh forgiveness. 

Now, though this were spoken unto Peter only, be- 
cause Peter only moved the question, yet pertaineth it 
unto us all, as w^ell as unto Peter. Are not we as much bound lo 
bound to forgive our neighbours, that repent and ask for^ forRlve our 
giveness, as Peter? Yes, verily. But because Peter only as -well as* 
asked the question, therefore did Christ teach us by Peter. ^^^'^ ^■•* 
If another had asked, he would have taught us by that bdWecrhU 
other. And in like manner, when Christ asked. Who say church 
ye that 1 am ? if any other of the apostles which believed confessJon 
it as well as Peter, had said as Peter Hid, Thou art of Jeter, 
Christ, the son of the living God, which art come into upon Peter. 



430 



THE PRACTICE 



[TyxotALK, 



A woman 
liath power 
lo bmd. 



noniiiti 
mn)^ bind 



Tobmdtlie 
cooacicnce^ 
and to re- 
prove open 
fiinncrs, 
pcrUioeth 
to the con- 
s-regntiorii 

Reasons 
that Peter 

will (lot tflf! 

grcAtCBt by 

dniliorUy 
giv'en liiin 
of CbriHt, 



Plater bnd 
lir»t Ilia 
sest St 
Antiocht 



the world of dinners, to save tliem : unto htm would 
Cbiist ha\e answered as he did to Peter, That iit>oii the 
rock of that, his confeasioRj lie would have built his church, 
and would have pronused him keys^ as well as he did Peter. 
Yea^ aiid iu the xviiith chapter of Matthew, Christ saith 
to all the apostles, yea, ntid to all cungregatioiis where 
sinners be, That whatsoever they bound should be bounds 
and whatsoever they loosed should be loosed* 

Moreover, every man and woman, that know Christ 
and his doctrine, have the keys, and power to bind and 
loose : in an order, and in their measure, as time, place, 
and occasion giveth, and privately* May not a wife, if 
lu^r husband sin a^ain§t God and her, aiul take another 
woman, tell bini his fault between him and her secretlji 
and in good manner humbly^ and bind his conscience vritfa 
the law of God ? And if he repent, may she not forgive 
him, and loose him, as well as the pope ? Yea, and better 
too^ as long as the sin is secret, inasmuch as he sitineth 
specially against her, and mit against the pope* 

And so may tlie son do to his fiither, and a servant to 
his master, and every man to his neighbour, as thou seest 
in the said xviiith chapter of Matlhew. Howbeit, to bind 
and loose in the conscience by open preaching, pertaineth 
unto the officers that are apfiointed thereto. And to bind 
and loose open sinners, and them that will not repent, till 
they be complained on unto tlie congregatioa, pertaiuedi 
unto the congregation* 

Finally, there were many that preaelied Christ at Rome, 
yet Peter came thither, if he came ever thither, as Paul 
and many other. Had tliey not authority to bind and 
loose 1 Or else how did they convert the people ? Peter 
also was an aposUe, and went from place to place as Paul 
did, and as Paul ordained bishops in ever>^ place lo leaeh 
the people, so no doubt did Peter. \\ hy then might not 
those bishops challenge autliority by Peter, as well as tliey 
of Rome ? they say also in their own legends, that Peter 
had his seat at Antiocli first* Did lie run tt> Rome 



Tyndalb.] 



OF PRELATES. 



431 



leaving no man behind him, to teach the people at Antioch ? 
God forbid. Why then might not that bishop challenge 
Feler'a authority ? They will haply say, sooner than prove 
it, diat Peter died at Rome, and therefore his authority is 
greatest there. Then by that rule, Christ's power is no 
where so full as at Jerusalem. But what hath Christ's 
invisible kingdom to do with places? Where Christ's 
goapel 18, there is his power full, and all his authority as 
wdl in one place as in another. 

Finally, to get authority whencesoever they can snatch 
it, they join Paul with Peter in their own laws, Distinctio 
ixii. saying, By the authority of Peter and Paul. Which 
is dean against themselves. For they say, in their own 
law, in the presence of the superior the power of the infe- 
rior ceaseth, and is none at all. Now if Peter be greater 
than Paul, then by that rule where Peter is present, there 
Paul is but a subject, and without audiority. And where 
Christ is present bodily and preacheth himself, there the 
apostles, give up their authority, and hold their peace, and 
sit down at his feet, and become scholars and hearken to. 

Wherefore, in that they join Paul with Pefer, and 
challenge their superiority as well by the authority of Paul, 
as of Peter, there they make Paul fellow and equal with 
Peter.. And thus it is false that Peter was greater than 
his fellows. But the blind owls care not what they howl, 
seeing it is night, and the day-light of God's word shut 
up, that no man can spy them. 

Moreover, with this term, Peter's seat, they juggle apace 
(as with infinite other) saying. That Peter's seat is the chief 
ieat ; but what Peter's seat is, that they tell you not. For 
wist ye that, ye should soon perceive that they lie. 
Peter's seat is no stool or chair (for what hath the king- 
dom of Christ to do with such baggage ?) but it is a spiritual 
thing. Christ saith in the gospel, (Matt, xxiii.) The 
scribes and pharisees sit on Moses' seat. What was 
Moses' seat there, a chair, or the temple, or the churches, 
or synagogue of the land? Nay verily, for Moses came 



Christ's 
power is in 
the gospel. 



Paul is 
CRlled to 
help. 



In the pre- 
sence of the 
greater, the 
power of 
the lesser 
doth cease. 



Paul is 
made equal 
fellow with 
Peter. 



Peter's 
seat, what 
It is. 



43^ 



THE PRACTICE 



[Tyndalk,! 




Petcr*fl 

lVter'« 

had Ptftef^s 
ke)»s, are 
till but one 



Peter* s s^it 



Tilt- pope 

tie Dcvil'i 
m*ftt, whose 
vicHf he is. 



Purgatory 

Tbe Pope 
snilh that 
purgatory 
U Id e&rtht 



I 



never tbere. But Moses' seat was Moses' law and doc- 
trine. Even so Peter's seat U Peter's doctrine, dje gospel 
of Christ, which Peter taught. And the same doctrine is 
Peter's ke}s : so that Peter's seat, Peter's keys, and Peter's 
docinne is all one thing. Now is Peter's doctrine, Paul's 
doctrine, and the doc tn lie of all the twelve aposdes, indif- 
ferently, for they laugh I all one thing* Wherefore, it fol- 
lowed! tliat Peter's keys* and Peter's seat, be tlie keys and 
seat of Paul al^o, and of all the other twelve ai^ostles^ and 
are nothing save the gospel of Christ. And thus, as 
Peter's doctrine is no better tbaii Paul's, but one diing ; 
even so Peter's seat is no greater, nor higher, nor holier 
tlian the seat of the other twelve* Peter's seat now is 
Christ's seat, Christ's gospel, on wliich all the aposdes sat, 
and on which this day sittelh all diey only that preach 
Christ truly. Wherefore, as antichrist preachelh not 
Peter's doctrine (whicli is Christ's gospel) so he sittethnot 
on Peter's seal ; but on the seat of Satan, whose vicar he 
is ; and on die seat of bis own laws and ceremonies, and 
false doctrine, wherennto he compelleth all men wiUi 
\iolence of sword* 

Then he climbed to purgatory with the ladder of die 
said text, W'halaoever diou bindest in earth, &c. Purga- 
toiy, saith he, is in earth : W' herefore, I am Lord there too. 
Nevertheless, as he can prove no purgatorj , so ran he not 
prove, that if there were any, it should be in the earth* 
It might well be in the element or sphere of fire under the 
moon, as well as in the earth. But to bind and loose is, 
as [ have above said, to preach, and to feed, and wiUi 
Christ's doctrine to purge souls. And they that be dead 
be not of the flock which Christ bade Peter feed, but they 
that live only. 4 

Tlien climbed he up with the same ladder still over all 
vows and professions of all religious persons, and over 
oaths made between man and man to dispense with them, 
and over all men's testamenUt, to alter them* For what 
thou makest an hospital, tliat will he shortly make a college 



I 
I 




TlfNDALE.] 



OF PRELATES 



453 



i 



of priests, or a place of refigion, or Mhat one lusteth. 
Then n\[ manner [of] monks and frmrs, and like draA, took 
dbpen sat ions of him for the ordinances of their old 
founders. And because, as tliey tliought, they had prayed 
and distributed for their souls enough to bring them out 
of purgatory, they thrust them out of their heed-rolls, and 
took dally more and mure. 

But ever since they look dispensations of the [Kipe, bolji 
for their rules, and to divide all among them, diey received 
in the name^ not of the p4>or, but of jmrgatory, to <f ueuch 
the raging fire thereof^ which is as hot as tlieir bellies can 
feign it, and fools be out of their wits to believe it ; 
promising a mass daily for forty shillings by the year, of which 
foundations when they have gotten twenty, ihey will yet, 
with an union purchased of the fjope, make but one 
chauntry. For if they should do all that they have promised 
from the first founder unto this day, ^ve hundred monks 
were not enough in many cloisters. 

Thinkest thou that men were e%'er so mad to make the 
fashions that are now among them ? to give the celarer 
iuch a sum, aiui the prior, or sub-prior, and the other of- 
ficers so nmch for their parts as they have yearly, and to 
exempt the abbot from hi^ bretlu^en, and to send him out 
of the abbey into such parks and places of pleasure, and 
give him a thousand, fifteen hundred, two thousand^ or 
three thousand pounds yearly, to sport himself withal ? 
Nay, but when through hypocrisy they had gotten land 
enough, then they turned unto the pope, and took dispen- 
satious both for their rules which were too hard for such 
abundance, and for the wills of their founders, and served 
m great sort of founders under one per domimim^ and di- 
^ed among few that which was enough for a greal mul- 
titude. 

It was the pope that devi>ied all these fashions, to cor- 
rupt the prelates with abundance of worldly pleasures, of 
which ho wist that the worst would be most greedy, and 
for which he wist also, that he should find Judases enough 

VOL. n. ^ F 



Tlie pnpc 
alCL^retli 

nml C^stii- 
metit* nt 
hia p Iff II- 






tJnifm. 



of abbeys* 



tiod'^ pur- 
the pope. 





434 



THE PRACTICE 



[Tystoalb. 



CUoppinif 
nnd 

iisect by ibe 
pope. 



The wicked 

□f bfneBcea 
Uy tlie 
popr. 



that would forsake Christ, and betray the truth, and be 
sworn fulse unto him and his Godhead. He maketli of 
many chuimtries one, of an abbey a cathedral churchy and 
out of the abbies plucked he the bishoprics. And as 
bishops pay for their bulb, even so do an infinite number 
of abbots in Christendom, in all lands some, which abbots 
l>e bishops within themselves^ and iiiiniediately under the 
pope. And other abbots and priors send after the same 
ensample daily unto Rome, to purchase licence to wear a 
mitre and a cros»j and gay ornaments » to be as glorious as 
the best, &c. And where before God no man is a priest 
but he that is appointed to preach Christ^s gospel unto 
the people ; and the people ought not to give ought uuto 
the spirituaUy^ but for the maintenance of the preaching 
of God^ii word ; the [>ope taketh six or seven ^ yea^ ten, 
tvienty, and as many beneiices as he listeth, and givelh 
tliem unto one that preacheth not at all ; as he doth all 
other dignities of tlie spiritually. He that will purchase 
and pay, and be swonj^ shall have what he will. 



HOW TFIEY PROVE ALL THEIR GENERAL 
COUNCILS, 



Tlie cburcb 
cut Dot err* 



^^HEN the bishops and abbots and other great prelate 
had forsaken Christ and his living, and were fallen 
down before the beast, the vicar of Sataji, to receive tl>eir 
kingdom of hiin ; then tlie pope called togetlier divers 
councils of such holy apostles, and there concluded and 
made of everj' opinion that seemed protitabie, an article of 
the faith. If thou ask where tlie Scripture is to prove it ? 
diey answer, We be the church, and cannot err, and there- 
fore, say they, M'liat we concludej though there be no 
Scripture to prove it, it is as true as the Scripture, and of 




["ifXDAtE,] 



OF PRELATES- 



435 



iia! autliority with the Scrifiture, and inuat be believed 
well as tlie Scripture^ under pain of damimtion. For, 
ly they. Our trutli dependeth not of the truth of the 
cripture, tliat is, we be nut true in our doing, becaufse the 
crtpture lestifieth unto uh that we do truly ; but contrary. 
The truth of the Scripture (say they) dependelh of us : that 
is, tlte Scripture is true, because that we admit it, and tell 
thee that it is true« For how couklst thou know that it 
ere the Scripture, except we told thee so '! and therefore! 
Ve need no witness of t^ie Scripture, for that we do it t» 
enough, that we so say of our own head, for we cannot err, 
U hich reason is like as though young monks newly 
^»f rofessed^ should come by the rules of their order and 
^wrdi nances of their old founders, and would go abont to 
^Hleep them ; and the old cankered monks should call them 
^■baek unto the corrupt and false manner that now is used, 
^(wying : Ye err. Do only as we teach you, for your pro- 
fession is to obey your elders* According unto the rules 
of our order, and ordinances of our founder, shall tliey say. 
We cait teach you no other, shall the old monks say, nor 
can tie unto you : ye ought, therefore, to believe us, and to 
do as we laid you. The young monks shall answer, We 
see that ye lie clean contrary uato all that is written in our 
rules and ordinances. The old monks shall say^ Ye cannot 
understand them except we expound them unto you, nei- 
ther yet know that tliey be your rules, except that ye believe 
that we cannot lie unto you. For how can ye know that 
these be your rules and ordinances, but as we your eldem 
tell you so ? now when we tell you that these be your rules 
mnd ordinances, how can ye be sure undoubtedly! that it 
is so, except ye believe undoubtedly that we cannot lie ? 
Wherefore, if ye will be sure that they be your rules and 
ordinauces, then ye must first believe that we cannot lie* 
Leave such imaginations and disputations therefore, and 
lay your rules and ordinances out of your hands, and look 
no more on them, for they make you err. And come and 
do aa we tell you and captivate your wits, and believe that 

2 F 12 



The pope 
tnith thitt 
tbij Scrip- 
ture 11 tntc 
not of it- 
m\(f Hut 
becAUJto be 

KDd &p* 
proTetli iL 

A slmill- 
tydt\ 



tdne ibc 
papiits 

iiscil in 
tbtkM! ilnyt. 




TJie nliliou 
keep tlie 
motikK in 

ftntf ilie Ui- 
t^bopa the 
priests. 



O^iin jmned 
wUh ptia 

|iaio HO' 
tiling. 



we eatinot lie uiito you and that ^ye Ciitmot understand yt»ur 
rules and ordinauces. Even so, if thou say it is coutniry 
unto the Scripture : they aiij^wer that thou luiderstaudesl 
it not, and that tliou must captive thy wit, and believe tliat^ 
though it seent never bo contrary, yet it is not contrary : 
no, if tiiey deterniiiie tliat Clirist is not risen again, and 
though the Scripture testify that he is risen again, yet, (say 
they) tliey be not contrary, if they be wisely understood- 
Thou mii^st believe, say they, that there b some other 
meaning iu the Scripture and that no man understaudeth 
it : but that we say, whether without Scripture, or against 
it, that must tlion believe that it is true* 

And thus, l>ecanse that the Scriptuie would not agree 
with them, they thrust it out of the way iirst, and ^hut up 
the kiugdojti of heaven, which is Christ's gospel, with 
false expositions, and \\ ith such sophistry, and with false 
piinciples of natural wisdotti. And t]je abbots took the 
Scripture fn>m their monks, lest some should ever bark 
against the abbots' living, and set up such long service 
and singing, to weary them withal, that they should have 
no leisure to read in the Scripture but with their lips» and 
made them good cheer to fill their bellies, and to stop tlieir 
mouths* And the bisho]>s in like manner, to occupy tlieir 
priests vvitlial, that they should not study llie Scripture for 
barking against tliem, set up l(ing service H'ondrous intri- 
cate, so that in a dozen years, thou couldat scarce leani lo 
turn aright uuto it: long matins, long even-songs, long mas- 
ses, longdiriges witli vantage yet to mitigate the tediousness, 
quia kvis e%t labor vum iucrOf for lucre (say they) makelli tlie 
labour light: ever nose! ling them in ceremonies, and in 
their own constitutions, decrees, ordinances and laws of 
holy church* 

And the promises luid testament which the sacrament of 
Christ's body and blood did preach flaily unto the people, 
that they put out of knowledge, and say now that it in a 
sacritice for the souls of purgatory, that they might tJie 
belter sell their mass. And iu tlio universities ihev have 



TvNiJAtK.] 



OF FRELATEis. 



4Sf 



^b1 



^ 
^ 



ordaiaed that no man dial I look cm the Scripture, until he 
be no^eJIed in heathen learning eight or nine years, and 
amied with false principles, with which he is clean shut 
out of the understanding of the Scripture. And at his 
first coming unto univei'sity he is sworn that he ^hall 
not defame tlie university whatsoever he seeth. And 
when he taketh first degree he is sworn that he shall hold 
none opinion condemned by the church, but what such 
opinions be, that he ^hall not know. And they when tJiey 
be admitted to study divinity, because the Scripture is 
locked up with such falseexposi Irons, and with false principles 
f natural philosophy tliat they cannot enter in, they go 
about the outside and dispute all thefr lives about words 
and vain opinions, pertaining a.s much unto the healing 
of a man'ft heel, as heulth of his soul. Provided yet 
alway, lest God give his singular grace unto any person, 
that none may preach except he be admitted of the bishops. 
Then came Thomas de Aquino and he made the pope a 
god with his sophistry, and the pope made him a saint for 
his labour, and called him doctor Sanctus, for whose ho- 
liness no man may deny whatsoever he saith, save in certain 
places, where among so many lies he said now and then 
true. And in like manner whosoever defend eth his tra- 
ditions^ decrees and privileges, htm he made a saint also 
for his labour, were his living never so contrary unto the 
Scripture; as Thomas of Canterbury, with many other 
like, whose life was like ITiomas Cardinal's, but not 
Cbrist*s, neither is Thomas Cardiniirs life any thing save 
a counterfeiting of St, Thomas of Canterbury^. Thomas 
Becket was first seen in merchandise temporal ; and then 
to learn spiritual merchandise he gat him to Theobald 
archbishop of Canterbury ; which sent him divers times 
to Rome about business of holy church. And when 
Theobald had spied his activity he shore him deacon lest 
he sliould go back ; and made him archdeacon of Canter- 
bur\, and upon that presented him to the king. And 
the king made luni his chancellor in which office he passed 



Th? cast of 



ProvisOi 



5t, Thnthiiti 
de Aquinii, 



SlUDlS. 



Thoiitas of 
b(iry. 



4SS 



THE PiucrncE 



[TVN1>AI^£* 



TliOttlAS 

Tbomui 
Woluey 

U}|fettier. 



The pope 
rewardclb 

wfaeD Cbey 
be demd* 



Policy* 



tfte pomp and pride of Tliotnas Cardinal as far as tbe on^'s 
shritie pas^th ihe otlier'g tomb in glory and riches. Aud 
after ihat^ he was a mati of war, and captain over five or 
six diousaiid meu in full harness as bright as St* George, 
and his spear in his hand ; and encountered whosoever 
came against him, and overthrew the jolliest rutter that 
was in all the host of France* Aim! out of the field liot 
from bloods hedding was he made bishop of Canterbury, 
and did put off his helmet, and put on his mitre ; put off 
his harness, and on with his robes ; and laid down his spear 
and took his cross, ere liis hands were cold, and so 
came with a histy courage of a man of war to figbt 
another while against his prince for the pope. Where 
his prince's causes were with ihe law of God and the pope's 
clean contrary* And the pomp of his consecration was 
after his old worldly fashion. Howbeit yet he is made a 
saint for his worshipping of the holy seat of St. Peter ; 
not that seat of Peter which is Christ^s gospel, but another 
lied to be Peter's, and is indeed cathedra pe^tUtntm^ a 
chair of false doctrine. And because he could no skill 
of our Lord's gospel, he said of matins with our lady. 
Such as understand the Latiti, read his life and compare it 
unto the Scripture, and tlien he shall see such holiness as 
were here too long to be rehearsed. And every abbey, 
and every cathedral church, did shrine them one god or 
other, and mingled the lives of the very saints with stark 
lies, to move men to offer, which thing they call devotion. 
And though in all their doings they oppress the tempo- 
ral ty and their common wealth, and be grievous unto the 
rich, and painful to the poor ; yet they be so many and 
so exercised in wiles, and so subtle, and so knit and 
Bworn together that they compass the temporally, and 
make them bear them whether they will or will not (as the 
oak doth the ivy) partly with juggling, and beside that with 
worldly policy* For every abbot will make him that may 
do most in the shire, or with the king, the steward of hb 
lands, and give him a fee yearly ; and will lend unlo some, 



Tyndalk,] 



OF rRKLATES. 



439 



^ and feast odier, that by sucli inea^ns tiiey do what they will* 
^m And little tna!$terpan»oii after the same matinerirhe come 
into an house and the wife be snout-fair he will root him- 
self liiere by one craft or other ; either by using such 
pastime as the good man doth^ or in being beueiicial by 
one way or other, or he will lend him, and so bring him 
into his danger that he cannot thrust him out when he would, 
btit must be compelled to bear liim^ and to let him be 
homely whether he will or no- 

tr EXAMPLE OF PRACTICE OUT OF OUR OWN 
CHUONICLES. 

'T'AKE an en sample of their practice out of our own 
stories. King Harold exiled or banished Robert arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, For whatcauae the English polichro- 

H iiicon specifieth not. But if the caii»e were not somewhat 
suspect, I think they would not have passed it over with 
bilence. This Robert gat him immediately unto king 
William the conqueror, then duke of Normandy, And 
the pope Alexander sent duke William a banner to go and 
conquer England ; and clean remission unto whosoever 
would follow the banner^ and go with king William* 
Here mark how straight the pope followed Christ's steps 
and his apostles! They preached forgiveness of sins to all 
that repented through Christ's bloodshedding; the pope 
preacheth forgiveness of sins to all that will slay their 
brethren bought with Christ'j^ bloody to subdue them unto 

■ his granny. Whatsoever other cause duke William had 
against king Harold, thou mayest be sure that tlie pope 
would not have meddled, if Harold had not troubled his 
kingdom: neither should duke William have been able 
to conquer the lajid at that time, except the spiritualty hud 



Tlie prac- 
tice af 1 it- 
tie master 
pftrsan. 



King 

RohcTl of 

Cnntcr- 

Uurj% 



Rem ill Ai [til 
of Bint la 

Note here 
how weU 
CKriAt unci 
tUe pope 

Christ bid** 
delU save, 
atid tbe 
popu bid* 
dtth kill. 





440 



THE. PRACTICE 



f'i 



Tlic t>ape U 
a Cf uci nnd 

tymat 



m cbiipUin 
of tbe 



llie |HJ|>e 

pleasfcd to 

nduiU 

!)nests tg 

not ii'ivo. 



Not* here 
the f rule 
tirid wkk- 
ednpBs of 
the po|ie. 

af fc'iris to 
canqurr 



wrought oil Im side. What blood did that cotique^it €o«t 
England, through which almost all the lords of the English 
blood were alaiii^ and the Normans became rulersj and all 
llie lawH were changed into French ! But what caretli the 
holy father for jf bedding of laymen's blood ? It were 
better that ten htmdred thau,^and lay knaves Wt tlieirljves^ 
tiian that holy church should lose one iuch of her honour, 
ar St. Peter's seat one jot of her right. 

And AuselniuSj that was bishop in short time after^ never 
left striving with Uiat mighty prince king W iUiam the 
second, until he had compelled him» maugre hi^ teeth, to 
deliver up the investiture or election of bishops unto St. 
Peter's vicar, w hich investiture was of old yme tlie king s 
duty. * 

And again, when the said king Wilham would have had 
the tribute that priests gave yeaily unto tlieir bisliops for 
their whores, paid to him ; did not Ralph bishop of Chi- 
chester forbid God's service (as they call it) and stop up 
the church doors w ith thorns, throughout all his diocese, 
until the king had yielded him up his tribute again ''! For 
wlieu the holy father had forbad priests their wives, the 
bisho]) permitted tliem whores of their own for a yearly 
tribute, and do still yet in all lands save in England where 
tliey may not have any otlier save men's wives only. 

And again, for the election of Stephen Langton Arcli^ 
bishop of Canterbury^ what misery^ and w retch edness wa;* 
in tlie realm a long season ! Then was the land interdicted 
many years. And when that holp not, tJien Irehuid rebel- 
led against king John immediately, and not witliuut the 
secret workings of our prelates I dare well say. But fi- 
nally, when neither the interdicting, neither that secret sub* 
tilty holp, and when John would in no means consent that 
St. Peter's vicar should reign alone over the spiritualty, 
and overall that perlainelh unto them, and that they should 
sin and dn all mischief unpunished^ the pope sent remis- 
sion of sms to the king of France, for to go and conquer 
hist land. Whereof king John was so sore afraid^ that he 



ITybjdale.] 



OP PUELATES. 



441 



jrielded up his crown to the pope, and sware to hold the 
land of binii and that his successors should do so like- 
wise. 

Ami again, in khig Richard's da}H the second, Thomas 
Arundel archbishop of Canterbury and chancel lor^ was 
exiled with the earl of Derby, The outward pretence of 
the variance between the king and his lords was for the 
deliverance of the town of Brest, in Britain, But our pre* 
H iate» had another secret mystery a brewing. They couiti 
"^not at their own Inst slay the poor wretches which at that 
time were converted unto rejientance and to tlie true faith, 
to put their trust in Christ's death and blood-shedding, for 
the remission of their sins by the preaching of John Wick- 
liffe* As soon as the archbishop was out of the realm, the 
Iiislimen began to rebel against king Richard^ as before 
against king John ; but not hardly without the invisible 
inspiratioft of them that rule boili in the court and also in 
the consciences of all men. They be one kingdom^ sworn 
together one to help another scattered abroad in all realms. 

• And howbeit that tliey strive among themselves who shall 
be greatest, yet against the temporal power they be always 
at one ; though they dissemble it and feign as though one 

•held against the other to know their enemy's secrets, to 
betray them withal* They can inspire privily into the 
breasts of the people what mischief they list, and no man 
shall know whence it cometL Their letters go secretly 
from one to anotlier throughout all kingdom 3> Saint 
Peter's vicar shall have word in fifteen or sixteen days, 
from the uttermost part of Christendom. The bishops of 
England at their need can write unto the bishops of Ire- 
land, Scotland, Denmark^ Dutchlandj France, and Spain, 
promising tliem as good a turn another time ; putting them 
in remembrance that they be all one holy church, and that 
the cause of the one is the cause of the other j saying, If 
our juggling break out, your's cannot be long hid. And 
the other shall sene their tttrn, and bring the game unto 
their haudsj and no man shall know how it cometh abotft. 







Practice of 



clergy arc 
secret and 
subtle ccm- 
apirators. 



4 IS 



THK I'RACTICE 



LTvNDAi.r^ 



A Irattor- 
uu> prac- 
tice. 



The p«piftt» 
one Btirren 
up of wars 
nnd nhed* 
dtfre of 
blood. 



Duke 

H«mpLry. 



Papiata are 
cryeU 



A pnTli&- 
uwnt kept 
at Hury. 
The dcnih 
of Hum- 
phry duke 
of Glcit'cu- 
lOF, pro* 
leclor of ttie 
Ff&lm of 
Eoflaad. 



An soon as king Richard was gone to Ireland, to sub- 
due these rebellions r the bishop came in again and pre- 
vented the kiugi and took up his power against him and 
took him prisoner^ and put him down^ and to death most 
cruelly^ and crowned tlie earl of Derby king. O merciful 
Christ ! what blood hath tliat coronation cost England ! 
But what care they ? their causes must be avenged. He 
13 not worthy to be kitig that will not avenge their quarrels. 
For do not the kings receive their kingdom of the beast ^ 
and swear to worship him, and maintain his throne 1 and 
then when the earl of Derby, which was king Henry the 
fourth J was crowned, the prelates took his sword and hij 
son'a, Hetu*y the fifth after him, (as all the king's h words 
since) and abused them to shed Christ's blood at their plea- 
sure. And they coupled their cause unto the king's cause, 
(as now) and made it treason to believe in Christ as the 
Scripture teacheth, and to resist tlie bishops, (as now) and 
thrust them in the king's prisons, (as now) so that it is no 
iiew^ invention Qiat they now do> but even an old practice, 
diough they have done their busy cure to hide tlieir science, 
that their conveyance should not be espied. 

And in king Harry the sixth's days^ how raged they as 
fierce bons against good duke Humphry of Glocester, the 
king's uncle and protector of the realm in the king's youth 
and childhood, because that for him they might not slay 
whom diey would, and make what chevisance they lasted. 
Would not the bishop of Winchester have fallen upon hint 
and oppressed him openly with might and power iti the 
city of London^ had not the citizens come to his help ? 

But at the last tliey found means to contrive a drift to bring 
their matters to pass, and made a parliament far from the ci- 
tizens of London, where was slain the good duke and only 
wealth of the realm, and the mighty shield that so long before 
that kept it from sorrow, which shortly after his death fell 
thereon by heaps. But the chronicles cannot tell where- 
fore he died nor by what means- JNo marvel verily. 
For he had need of other eyes than such as the world seeth 



Tyxdalb.] 



OF PRELATES. 



443 



widial that should spy out their privy paths. Nevertheless, 
the chronicles testify that he was a villous man, a godly, 
aud good to the commonwealth. Moreover the proctor of 
purgatory saith in his dialogue, quoth I, and quoth he, 
and quoth your friend, how that the foresaid duke of Glou- 
cester was noble man and a great clerk, and so wise that 
he could spy false miracles and disclose them, and judge 
diem from die true, which is an hateful science unto our 
spiritualty, and more abhorred amongst them than necro- 
mancy or witchcraft ; kad a thing wherefore a man by their 
law, I dare well say, is worthy to die, and that secretly if it 
be possible. Now to be good to die commonwealth, and to 
seefidsemiracles; and diirdly, to withstand diat France, then 
brought under the foot of die Englishmen, should not be 
set up again, by whose power the pope holdeth down the 
emperor and reigneth in his stead, be causes why he might 
die diough by what means be not known. 

For to be good to the commonwealth is to be hurtful 
to the spiritualty, seeing die one is the other's prey, as 
the lamb is the wolf's. Secondarily, if a man be so 
clear-eyed that he can spy false miracles, how can jug- 
l^ers get their living and be in price where such a fellow 
is ? Thirdly, to keep down the kingdom of France is to 
pull St Peter's vicar out of his seat. 

Now if the great bawd the whore of Babylon were de- 
dettroyed, then would the brothel and stews of our prelates 
riiortly perish. If Abaddon, that destroyer, king of the 
grasshoppers which devour all that is green, were de- 
stroyed, then were the kingdom of our caterpillars at an 
end. 



This is Sir 

Thomas 

More. 



Theclef^ 
cannot 
nbide them 
that can 
judge false 
miracles. 

The caoses 
why the 
duke of 
Olocester 
was mur- 
dered. 



The pope is 
the whore 
of Babylon. 




441 



THE PitfiCFICE 



rTi'KiJALKp 



BY WHAT CRAFT THE V\WE KEEPETH THE 
EMPEROR DOWN, 



ArK>tlicr 
pruUUM. 



Po|ies liairu 

CRiprrur^t 
arc] like- 
wise (Miipe- 
rors Uiivc 
deposed 
popes. 



Na man 
suAjr rctiukc 
Ibe poftc 

far iti^ 
miRcUiL'f 
Uiut lie 
dulb. 



]1/TAIIK another practice of otir moj*t holy prebtcs. 
When the empire was tmnslaled unlo tlie Gcnnaiis, 
though the emperor was fallen down mod bad kissed the 
pope's feet J and was become his sworn sen aiit ; yel there 
was much strife and open war ofltimes between tJie popes 
and the emperors. And the popes have put down ti.any 
good emperors by help of the bishops, which everywhere 
aecreth persuaded tlie lords to forsake the emperors, and 
to take dispensations of the pope for their oaths. 

And contrariwise, the emperors have now and then de- 
posed diverse popes at the request of the cardinals and 
other great prelates ; by whose help only tliey were able 
to do it. For else verily^ though all kings christened had 
sworn to depose one pope out of his seat, if they had not 
the fa\x»ur of other prelates thereto, they might haply by the 
secret practice of them, to be put out of their own^emts in 
the mean time. 

The [Hipe therefore, to be sure of himself, and out of 
the fear and danger of the emperor, were he never so 
mighty, and that the emperor should not see his daily open 
pastimes, made friendship and amity with the Venetians 
on one side of him, and let them come into certain cities 
of the emperor's in Italy j and with tlte French king on the 
other side, and let him also up into certain cities and pos- 
sessions of the emperors, and he himself in the midst: and 
shut out the emperor from coming any more to Rome, and 
ever sent his coronation home to him. And then he made 
a law that no man should rebuke the pope for whatsoever 
he did ; saying, that the pope was over all, and judge 
overall, and none over him ; and therefore forbad In his 
law, Dhtimtio^ sL Si Papa^ saying, lliough the pope lie 



* TVNDALK.] 



OF PRELATES, 



44S 



negligent about hi in self, and also tlie soul-he a I ili 
of his brethreu, and slack in his worksy and speechless as 
concerning m\y good, and draw to him by his example in- 

» numerable people to hell to be punished with him with 
divers toiments everlasting ; yet see tliat no mortal man 
presume once to rebuke his faults here. For he shall 
judge all men and no man hinu O antichrist * Is he not 
antichrist that will not have his life tried by God's word? 
If the Venetians catch any of our holy father*^ towns or 
possessions, whether by war, or that they have bought 
I ]t| or that it be laid to mortgage unto them, or that the old 
hath given it with the marriage of some daughter 
^^mto the duke of Venice ; then tlie holy father that suc- 
ceedeth, when he seetli his season, sendeth for it again, 
saying, That it is not law ful for laymen to withhold St* Pe- 

*ter*s patrimony. If they allege that they bought it and 
50 forth, his fatherhood answered, That the old pope had 
none authority to make any such chevisance with St* Pe- 
ter's inheritance : he could have but tlte use of it his life 
lon^j and after it must needs return unto his successor 
again. And upon that he tnterdieteth them, and curseth 
them as black as coals chjwn to tJie pit of helL 

But the Vt*netians knowing more of our holy father's 
practice for their nighness than we which dwell afar off, 
and wiser than we of cold countries, perceiving also that 
their colour changetli not widi hjs cursing, and that they 

H sink not, and that their meat digesteth as well as before, 
and that (as Erasmus saith) they s • . t as easily as before, 
(\^ith reverence of the holy course, I speak it) and there- 

H fure fear not his interdiction nor excommunication* 

Then our holy fatlier raiseth up all the [jower that he is 
able to make in Italy against diem^ and sendeih for the 

H Socheners to come and help. If he be not yet strong 
enough, then he sendeth unto the bishops of France, 
warning them that if his seal decay, dieir's cannot long 

■ prosper, and therefore that they put Uieir king in remem- 
brance, how that he is called must Christian king, and 



Venetinna, 



The pop« 
tniiy prt 
And take 
Hj^iiiti nt hli 
wil[ iUid 



Tlic Veno- 
tUns cnrt* 
aH for the 
(>n|je» nod 
riir*iijg fur 





416 



THE PRACTICE 



[TlTNDAi^C. 



Freucli- 






iTie prac- 
tice of the 
pQpe with 
nil kings 
niiil 
pfl licet* 

The pope 

ftbreakcrof 

peat^e. 



Tie abuse 
of the SA- 
crament. 



that they desire him to da samewhat for his title^ against 
ihi!^ disobedient rebel lian utito the most holy S€e of Rotnei 
our mother holy church. 

I f another time the Fretichmeti come to our holy father^ 
as they be ever gaping for Italy to bring the empire home 
again to Fratice* Then tliat moat holy vicar bringeih his 
whole power against them, with the power of the Vene- 
tians, and with his old friends the Socheners. If he be 
not yet strong enough^ tlien he sendeth to tlie bishops of 
Etigland; to help their god, and to move their king lo do 
somewhat for holy church, putting him in remembrance 
of whom he holdeth his crown and oath, and how many 
caps of maintenance have beeQ ever sent unto bts fore- 
fathers^ and what honour it was unto them, atid that he 
may easily get as great honour as they^ and haply a more 
excellent title, if he will take our holy father's part; be- 
sides that he shall purchase remission of all his sina. 

Then must the peace and all the appointments made 
between us and France be broken, and the king must 
take a dispensation for his oath. For the king of France 
will attempt nothing in Italy, until he have sent his am- 
bassadors, and have made a perpetual peace with our 
king, the sacrament of the body of our Saviour broke 
between them to confirm the appointment. But I sup- 
pose that the breaking signilieth that the appointment 
shall not long endure, for a great deal of flour would 
not make so many hosts, (as lliey call them) or singing 
loves, as hath been broken in our days between Chris- 
tian princes, (as they will be called) to confirm pro- 
mises that have not long been kept* Other use of that 
blessed sacrament will the princes none know: but 
Christ ordained it to be a perpetual memory that his 
body was broken for our sins upon the cross, and that all 
that repent should receive, as oft as they eat of it, for- 
giveness of their misdeeds, througli faith. If the kings 
of the earth, when they break that sacrament between 
them, do say on thiswise : ITie body of our Saviour 




XyXDALfiJ 



OF PRELATES. 



4 



I 



which was broken on the cross for the sin of all that 
ipent, and have good hearts, and would fain keep his 
aw) be broke unto iny damnation, if I break diis oalli ; 
iUeu is it a terrible oath, and they had need to take heed 
w they make it ; and if it be lawfuHy made, not to 
break it at alL But a» they care for their oath, which diey 
make in wedlock, so they care for this. 

Whatsoever need the pope hatli^ he will not send to 
the emperor to come and help him in Italy, for fear lest 
he would take to himself whatsoever he conquered of the 
Frenchmen, and wax too strongs and minish our holy father^s 
power^ and become our holy father's vicar, as he is St. 
Peter's, Nevertheless, if we Englishmen will hire the 
emperor to come and iight against France, for the right 
of the church in these quaiiera that be next unto us, his 
faUierhood is content to admit his service. 

When our king hath granted to take our holy father's 
part, then the pretence and cloak outward must be, that 
the king will challenge his right in France. And to aid 
the king in his right, must the commons be milked till 
they bleed again, llien to do the king service, the lords 
aell^ or lay their lands to mortgage. Then is clean re- 
mission given, to slay French dogs. He that dieth in the 
uarrel shall never &ee purgatory, but fly to heaven straight, 
•fven with a thought. 

When the pope hath what he desireth in Italy, then 
ust we make peace with the Frenchmen again imme- 
diately, that France be not altogether trodden under the 
t ; but that it remain alway in a mean state, strong 
enough to match the emperor, and to keep him down, 
but not too mighty for oppressing the pope* And then 
our prelates, to bring the peace about, send immediately 
a friar Forest, or a vicar of Croydon, to preach before 
the king, and liis lords ; wliich preacher roareth and 
crieth unto them, as though he hallooed his hounds, 
and maketh exclamations^ raying: Alas, what will ye 



44* 

How the 

McmmRiit 

broken bw 
tween 
kings ikad 
prmccfl* 



The pope 
woiiLd not 
have the 
ampetor 
too fltrong. 




Remission 
of iins^ ftod 
tlean deli- 
verance out 
of purga- 
tory^ 



A TriMr Fo* 
rest, or a 
vicar of 
Croydon, 




44g 



THE PRACTICE 



[Tyxi>alb- 



Fopiab 
priictic«A. 






HeiiryV. 



Kiiif 
Henry V, 

conquered 
more tlifin 
the prelates 
IbougUt be 



Hcory VL 



p 



do ? spare Christian blood : will ye slay your owii souls 1 
Be not the Frenchmen as well Christian as ye 't More- 
over, ye slay poor innocents that never offended. Make 
peace for the pulsion of Christ* Kill not one another, as 
thougli Christ had not died for you ; but light ratlier 
againat the Turks, 

Then come in the ambassadors of France, ajidnioney^ a 
few prelates, and certain otlier the king's play-felJows, 
that be sworn with them to betray both tjie king and llie 
realnt too ; and then is peace concluded. But outwardly 
there is nothing save a truce taken for half an year^ till our 
ioldiers be at home again, for fear lest they would not l>e 
content* Then cometh the whole host home beggared , 
both great and smaU. And the poor that cannot sud- 
denly get work; fall to stealing, and be hanged ut home. 
This could More tell in his Utopia, before he was the 
cardinal's sworn secretary, and fallen at liis foot to betray 
the trutli, for to get promotion. 

Take an example : tlie bishops sent king Henry the 
fifth out to conquer France, The cau^^e was, saith tlie 
Cliroiiicles, that the king went about to take their ttm- 
poralties from them. And^ therefore, to bring the king 
into another imagination, they mo n led him^ and sent him 
into France. 

When they had sent out the king, he conquered more 
tliati was tlieir ^iill, and more than they supposed pos- 
sible for him, in so short space, and brought France clean 
under the foot j m that our prelates had much secret 
business to set it up again, but what is impossible unto 
so great gods ? 

Inking Henry's, the sixlli, d^ys, our holy father of Rome 
made the bishop of Winchester a cardinal » which went shortly 
after into France to treat of a truce between England and 
France. And him met a legate of Romc^, and cardinal 
also : after which meeting, EngU.^liuien hud ever the worse 
in France, and their chiefest friend, the duke of Burgaine^ 
forsook them. For when cardinal and bishops meet Ity- 




TiXDALK.] 



OF PRELATES. 



410 



^ 



gedier, they have tlieir secret couticil by themselves, wherein 
they conclude iieitlier what is good for EngUud^ nor yet 
for France, but what is best for our holy father's profit, 
to keep hiin in his state* 

When king Henry wai of age, there was a marriage 
between him and the earl of Armagnac's daughter, in 
Ryati ; with the which should have been given many 
castles and towns in Ryan, and a great sum of money 
thereto. But that marriage wan broken, not without the 
a^ret working of our prelates, and dispensation of our 
holy father, thou mayest be sure. And a marriage was 
made between him and the king's daughter^ of Sicily, for 
which England gave up the wliole dukedom of Ryan, and 
earldom of Maine, whereby we lost all Normandy, where- 
of they were the key. And beside that, the commons 
gave a fifteen and an half, to tit her in with pomp. And 
tlien was the good duke of Gloucester traitorously mur- 
dered ■ partly, because he could judge false miracles, and 
partly of the deliverance of these two countries. For he 
being alive, they durst not do it. 

And when king Edward had put down king Harry, a 
marriage was made and concluded between him and the 
king of Spain, this queen's mother that now is, But ere the 
ambassadors were come home, our prelates had bewitched 
king Edw ard by tlieir apostle, friar Bungay, and married 
him unto a widow that was a knight's wife, lest if Spain and 
England had been joined togedier, king Edward should have 
recovered France again. But what followed after the break- 
ing off the marriage between king Edward and the earl of 
Warwick ? and what came of his children ? yea, and what 
came on king Henry of Windsor's children also ? But what 
care our prelates what vengeance or mischief fall on princes, 
or on their realms^ so their kingdom prosper ! 

In king Henry's days, the cardinal Morton, and bishop 
Fox, of Winchester, delivered unto the king's grace, the 
confessions of as many lords a.^ his grace lusted. Who- 
i^noever was mistrusted, if he shrove himself at theCharter- 

VOL* lU 2 o 



Tiae ct^tf 
prnctic^ of 
the pope*9 




The mur- 
riMge ijf 
k I tiff Henrr 
VI 



The fluke 
uF Gloitce4- 
t«r irnitar- 
onaly mur- 
dered. 



Friar Bon* 
gay* 



Cruel war 
bQlween 
kinf H^tkTf 
and tUe 
Pari of 
Warwick ♦ 



ConfeAsiaa 
ui tht* ear 
WHS ft w'ick- 
ed lEivGti'^ 
tloD. 



4.10 



THE PRACTICE 



[I'vxrAr^K 



Licence of 
the tH>pe 
for foil rteeo. 
to study^ ne- 
cromancy* 



practice of 



He mcAD^ 

(Unal 
Wolscy. 



houses, Sion, Greenwich, at St* John's, or wheresoever 
it was, the confessor was commanded by the authority of 
the pope to deliver his confession written, and aMom tliat 
it waa alL And cardinal Morion had a licence of the 
pope for fourteen to study necrunmncyj of which he 
himself was one ; and otiier I have heurd named, which 
at this time I pass over witli silence. And how the holy 
friar's observants carried feigned letters to try who was 
true, 1 pass over w ith silence also. Howbeit, such tempta- 
tions and feigned proffers were enough to move tliem lliat 
never would have thought amiss : yea, and in confession, 
men will shrive themselves of thoughts which they never 
went about in the outAvard deed. 

When any great man h put to death, how his confessor 
eutreateth him, and what penance is enjoined him, coo- 
ceniing what he shall say, when he Cometh unto the place 
of execution, I could guesa at a practice that might make 
men's ears glow. 

And did not the subtle counsel of the said two prelates 
feign the siege of Boulogne to matte a pretence to gather 
in a 6fteen, when there was no more war between the king 
of France, and of England, than is between a man's head 
that hath lust to nleep and his pillow ? which siege yet 
cost many a man their lives, jea, and some great men 
tliereto, which knew not of that saying* The king's grace 
went over with a ten thousand meu to conquer all France, 
and spent haply an hundred thousand pound, of which he 
saved the fourth part in tlie dandy prats, and gathered at 
home five or six hundred, or more. And two other such 
feigned voyages could I haplv rehearse, which I pass met 
for divers causes, where many an Englishman lost his Ufe* 
But what care they for men's lives ? 

And did not our Cardinal with like policy think ye, to 
gather that which he thought would not well be paid, 
except the commons saw some cause, bring a great mul- 
titude of Scots unto the English pale, either by some 
bishops of Scotland, or by some great man whom he cor- 



Tlf^LIALK ] 



OF PRELATES. 



4M 



I 
\ 



Ler. it'uU 



rtipted with same yearly peusioii ? agutcst Mtiich the poor 
norlhern men must go on their own cost to keep them out. 
And general procession was commanded at London thrice 
in the week^ and throughout all the land^ while the king's 
receivers gathered the tax of the common people* Which 
plague, and such like, after the threatening of God 
Lev. xxvi* and Deut. xxviii* and xxix. I am sure wUl fall 
on all Christendom without cease, until tliey either defy 
the name of Christ with the Turks ; or, if they ^vill be called 
Christian, they turn and look ou his doctrine. 

Yea, and what feigned the cardinal at that great loan to 
beguile his own priests to make them swear what the/ 
were worth, and the better willing to pay, for the common 
priests be not so obedient unto their ordinaries that they 
will pay money, except they know why. Now it is not 
expedient that every rascal should know the secrets of the 
very true cause, for many considerations* And therefore, of ihe^^pr/- 
another pretence nmst be made, and another cause alleged, ^^^^^t « Hh 
And therefore, the priests were charged by their ordinaries prieat^^ 
to appear before the gentlemen of the country, and tem- 
poral officers, and swear what every man was worth. 
Now the priests had lever be slain, and die martyrs after 
the ensaniple of list. Thomas of Canterbury, tlian to sweai* 
before a lay judge, for they think it greater sin than to 
slay their own fatliers, and that then the liberties of the 
church were clean lost, and tliey no better than the vile 
lay people. Aad when they were in that perplexity that 
they must either swear or run into the king's danger and 
lose their gods (I would say their goodij) then my lord 
cardinal sent down his gracious power, that they should 
swear unto their ordinaries only. And then the priests, 
for joy that they were rid out of the laymen's hands, were 
io glad and joyous, that they wist not what thanks to give 
my lord cardinal, and so were obedient to swear, and to 
lend, or else for all the curses that my lord cardinal hath, 
and the pope too, they would neither have sworn, or paid 

a penny. 

2 G 2 




45$ 



THE PRACTICE 



[TlfK»AX£. 



THE PRACTICE OF OUR TIME. 



TKouint 
WaUey, 



The de- 
dcriptlnn of 
i-jtriliiiKl 



birth » tnU 

keil by ibe 
cardionl. 

Cftlk king'i 
xiatintiei. 



^LTHEN the kii]g*3 grace cEime first to the right of ihe 
crown, and unto the governance of the realm young 
and une Xpert, Thomas Wolsey, a man of lust and courage, 
and bodilv strength, to do and to suffer great tilings^ and 
to endure in all manner of voluptuousness ; expert and ex- 
ercised in the course of the world, as he which had heard > 
read J and seen much policy ; and had done many things 
himself, and had been of the secret counsel of weighty 
matters, as subtle as Sinon, that betrayed Troy ; utterly 
appointed to semble, and dissemble, to Itave one thing in 
the heart, and another in the mouth, being thereto as elo- 
quent, as subtle, and able to persuade what he lusted to 
them that were unexpert : so desirous, and greedy of 
honour, that he cared not but for the next and most com- 
pendious way thereto, whether godly, or ungodly : this 
wily wolf, I say, and raging sea, and shipwreck of al] 
England, though he shewed himself pleasant, and calm 
at the first (as whores do unto their lovers) came unto tlie 
king^s grace, and waited upon him, and was no man so 
obsequious and servicable, and in all gamea and sports 
the first and neit at hand j and as a captain to courage 
other, and a gay finder out of new pastimes, to obtain 
favour witliah 

And thereto, as the secret communication went, which 
by many tokens thou mayest well conjecture and gather 
to be true, he calked tlie king's nativity and birth, which is 
a common practice among prelates in all lands, whereby, 
he saw whereunto the king's grace should be inclined all 
his life, and what should be like to chance him at all 
times. 

And as 1 heard it spoken of divers, he made by craft of 
necromancy, graven imagery to bear upon him, wherewith 
he bewitched the king's mind, and made the king to dote 



Tyndale,] 



OF PRKLATES* 



453 



I 



» 

N 



N 
^ 



tipon him more than ever he did on mny Udy or geatie- 
womaiij no lUiit now the king's grace followed Kini; as he 
before followed the king. And then^ what he said, that 
was wisdom ; what lie praise d, that was honourable only< 
Moreover, in the meantime he spied out the natures and 
dispositioos of the king^s play-fellows i and of all that were 
great ; and whom he spied meet for his purpose him he 
flattered I and him he made faithful in great promises, and 
to him he sware, and of him he took an oath again, that 
tlie one should help the other i for without a secure t oath 
he admitted no man unto any part of his privities^ 

And ever as he grew in promotions and diy;nity, so 
gathered he unto him of the most subtle wilted, and of 
them that were drunk in the desire of honour, most like 
unto himself. And after they were sworn, he promoted 
them^ and wiUi great promises made them in falsehood 
faithful, and of them ever presented unto the king^s grace, 
and put them into his service, saying. This is a man meet 
for your grace. And by these spies (if ought were done, 
or spoken in the court against the cardinal) of that he had 
word within an hour or two. And then came the cardinal 
to court with all his magic, to persuade to the contrary < 
If any in the court had spoken against the cardinal, and 
the same not great in the king's favour, the cardinal bade 
him walk, a villain^ and thrust him out of the court 
headlong. If he were in conceit with the king's grace, 
then he flattered and persuaded, and corrupted some with 
gifts, and sent some ambassadors, and some he made 
captain at Culais^ Ames, Guives, Jersey, and Guernsey, 
or sent them to Ireland, and into the north ; and so 
occupied them, till the king had forgot them, and otlier 
were in their rooms, or till he had sped what he intended. 

And^ in like manner, played he with the ladies and 
gentlewomen. ^\hoaoever of them was great with her, 
was he familiar, and to her gave he gifts. Yea^ and where 
St. Thomas of Canterbury was wont to come after, Thomas 
cardinal went oft before, preventing his prince, and per- 




King 
Henry 
\ni hud 

Wolsey m 
grent estl- 



The min^ 

ner luid 
pr&clke or 
cardinal 



The king 
IB betmycd. 



The qqeen 
u betniy«d. 




464 TH£ PRACnCE [TvasoAU. 

Notetlilt Terted thcr Order of the holy flian. tf any 'Wenr subtle 
^ia^ Mrftted, and meet for Us purpose, her made heswotn to 
betray, the 4ueen likewise, and to t^ him what die 
said, or did. 1 know one diat depaited the oourt for 
tio otfier cause, dmn that she would no looger betrsy 
her mistress. 

And sifter the eaine etisampler he furnished the court 
with chaplains of hiM uwn sworn disciples, aud children of 
his owu bringing up to be aUvay present, and to dispute 
of vanities, and to water wbat^oe^er the cardinal had 
planted. If among those cormorants any yet began to 
be too much in favour with the king^ and to be somewhat 
busy in the court, and to draw any other way than as my 
lord cardinal had appointed that the plough should go, 
anon, he was sent to Italy, or to Spain : or, some 
quarrel was picked against him, and so was thrust out of 
the court, as Stokesly was- 
Thm Udum ^^ promoted the bii^hop of Lincoln that now is, his 
of liaeoln. most faithful friend, and old companion, and made him 
confessor : to ^hom of whatsoever the king's grace shrove 
himself, think ye not, that he spake so loud, that the 
cardinal heard iti and not unright: for as God*s 
creatures ought to obey God and serve his honour; so 
ought the pope's creatures to obey the pope, and serve 
his majesty. 

Finally, Thomas Wolsey became what he would, even 
Woliey porter of heaven, so that no man could enter into promo> 
^Iher!^^ tion but through him. 



Tyndalk.] of prelates. 455 

THE CAUSE OF ALL THAT WE HAVE SUFFERED 
THESE TWENTY YEARS. 



A BOUT the beginning of the king's grace that now is, 
France was mighty, so that I suppose it was not 
mightier this five hundred years. King Lewis of France J^***? 
had won Naples, and had taken Bononia from from St. 
Peter's see. Wherefore pope Julius was wrath, and cast {j^* ^^' 
how to bring the Frenchmen down, yet soberly, lest 
while he brought him lower, he should give an occasion 
to lift up the emperor higher. Our first voyage into Spain 
was to bring the Frenchmen lower. For our men were 
set in the fore-front and borders of Spain, toward Gas- Thw is true 
coyne, partly to keep those parties, and partly to fear ^' 
the Gascoynes and to keep them at home, while in the 
mean time the Spaniards won Navarre. When Navarre 
was won our men came to house, as many as died not 
there ; and brought all their money home again save that they 
spent there. Howbeit for all the loss of Navarre, the French- 
men were yet able enough to match Spain, the Venetians, 
and the pope, with all the socheners that he could make ; 
so that there was yet no remedy but we must set on the 
Frenchmen also, if they should be brought out of Italy. 

Then pope J ulius wrote unto his dear son Thomas Wolsey, 
that he would be as good, as loving, and as helping to holy 
church as any Thomas ever was, seeing he was as able. 
Then the new Thomas, as glorious as the old, took the 23*® ^^^ 

. 1 1 . ..11-, All Thomas. 

matter m hand and persuaded the kmg s grace. And then 

the king's grace took a dispensation for his oath, made upon 

the appoiniment of peace between him and the French 

king, and promised to help the holy seat wherein pope Mazimilian 

Peter never sat. But the emperor Maximilian might in '^^ ^™P®" 

no wise stand still, lest the Frenchmen should money him, kin^ Henry 

and get aid of liim, since the Almains refuse not money soldier. 



45^ 



THE PRACTICE 



[Tysdalic^ 



of sma. 



Note hcTC 
the subtiUy^ 
iind emit of 
tUe pope. 



How kiog 
Hedry 

VIU. with 
iiU lib Ar- 
my wn»^ 
ibuied. 



wlieiicesoever it be proferred ; llieii (]uut)) Thomas WolseTf 
Oh^ £itid like your grace, what an honour ^hoyld it be unto 
your grace if ihe emperor were your soldier ! ^o great ho- 
nour never cliauced atij king christened ; it should be }ipo- 
ken of while the world siood ; Uie glorv and honour fhall 
hide and darken tlie cost that it §haH never be seen though 
h should cost half your realm ! Diiit^ et J art am est. 
It was even so. And then a parliament, and then pay : 
and then npou the French dogs with clean remission of all 
his sin^ that stew one of them^ or if he be Uain^ (for the 
pardons have no strength to save in this life, but in the life 
to come only,) then to heaven straight^ without feeling of 
the paius of purgatory. 

Then c&me our king witli all his might by sea and by 
land, and the emperor with a strong army, and the Spa- 
niards and the pope> and tlie Venetians, all at once against 
king Lewii> of France. As soon as the pope had that he 
desired in Italy, then peace immediately* And Frencli- 
men were christian men ; and pity^ yea, and great mu also> 
were it to shed their blood ; and the Fretich king was the 
most christian king again. And thus was peace concluded, 
and our Englishmen^ or rather sheep, came home against 
winter^ and left their fleeces behind them. Wherefore no 
small nuniber of them while tliey sought tliem better rai- 
ment at home, were hanged for tlieir labour. 



WHY THE KINGS SISTER WAS TURNED UNTO 
PRANCE, 



l^HEN this peace was made, our holy cardinals and 
bishops (as their old guise is to calk and cast forty, 
fifty, yea, an hundred years before, what is like to chance 
unto their kingdom) considered how the emperor that now 
is, was most like to be chosen emperor after his grandr 



^TVKDALK.] 



OF PRELATES. 



^ 



father MaKimilmn ; for Maxuuiliaa hud already obtahied 
of divers of the electors that it should be so> 

They considered also how niightv he should be ; first 
kiug of Spain with all that |H?rtaiueth thereto, which was 
wotit to be Ave, hik, or seveu kingdoms : then duke of 
Burgoine, earl of TlauderSjof Holland, Zealand, and Bra- 
bant, with ail that pertain thereto i then emperor, and his 
brother duke of Austria, and his sister queen of Hungary. 
Wherefore, thought our prelates, if we take not heed 
betimes, our kingdom is like to be troubled, and we to be 
brought under the feet ; for tliis niau shall be so mighty, 
ihat he shall with power take out of the French king's 
hands, out of the hands of the Venetians, and from the pope 
also, whatsoever pertaineth unto the empire, and what- 
soever be Ion get h unto his other kingdoms and dominions 
thereto ; and then will he come to Rome and be crowned 
there ; and so shall he overlook our holy father and see 
what be doth : and then shall the old heretics rise up 
again and say that the pope is antichrist, and stir up again 
and bring to light that \^'e have hid and brought asleep 
with much cost, pain, and blood-shedding^ more tlian this 
hundred years long. Considered also that his auut is 
queen of England, and his wife the king of England's sis- 
ter ; considered the old amity between the house of Bur- 
goine and the old kings of England, so that they could 
never do aught in France without their help : and last of 
all considered the course of merchandize that England hath 
in those parts, and also the natural hate that Englishmen 
bear to Frenchmen. Wherefore if we shall use our old 
practice, and set the French king against him, then he shall 
lightly obtain the favour of the king of England, by the 
means of his aunt and his wife, and aid with men and mo- 
ney ; wherefore we must take heed betimes and break this 
amity ; which tiling we may by this our old craft easily 
bring to pass. Let us take a dispensation and break this 
marriage, and turn the king's sister unto the French king : 
if the French king get a male of her, then we shall lightly 



457 



Tl*e pre- 
IhCch nee 
ever be- 
forclmi»cl 
wliHtblike 
to toUoir. 



grent fori;- 
ciuHtefS i>f 



Pr^Lice. 






4^H 



to Frmacv. 



THE PRACTICE 



[ Tvmdalic;. 



make our kiug protector of Frauce^ and so sliall England 
and France be coupled togellier ; and as for the queen of 
Ejtgland^ we nhuW trim her well enough, and occupy the 
king with strange lave , aud keep her tliat she shall bear no rule* 
And m the gods Jiad spoken so it came to pas§, Ouj fair 
)*oung daughter was sent to the old pocky king of France, 
tlie \eur before our nioital enemy, and a miscreant war»t.' 
than a Ttirk^ and dtJ$obedieat unto our holy father, and no 
more obedient than he wa^^ compelled to be against his 
wilL 



THE CAUSE OF THE JOURNEY TO CALAIS. 



Traitorous 
prelatc.-t. 



The pomp 
find appfi- 
1-cl of the 
cariJin&l 

chaplnin* 
pmed Che 

ApOStlet. 



TN short space thereafter, Thomas ^\'olsey, now car- 
dinal and legate a latere, and greatly desirous to be pope 
also, thought it exceeding expedient for his many se- 
cret purposes, to bring our king and the king of 
France that now is together, botli to make a perpetual 
peace and amity between them, and that (while tlie two 
kings and iheir ladies dallied together,) the great cardinals 
and bishops of both parties might betray them both, and 
the emperor and all christiaii kings there to > 

Then he made a journey of gentlemenj arrayed al- 
together in silk, so much as dieir very shoes and lining of 
tiieir bootS} more like their mothers than men of war; yea 
I am sure that many of their mothers would have been 
ashamed of so nice and wauton array ; howbeit they went 
not to make war, but peace, for ever and a day longer* 
But to speak of the pompous apparel of my lord himself, 
and of his chaplains, it passeth the twelve apoi»t]es. I 
dare swear that if Peter and Paul had seen tliem suddenly 
and at a blusiij they would ha\e been harder of belief that 
they or any such should be their successors, than Thomas 
Didimus wm to believe that Chnst was risen again from 
death. 



Tykwalk.J 



OF PRELATES. 



459 



When all was concluded between the king of France and 
ourSy that Thomas Wolsey hlid devised, and when the pre- 
lates of both parties had cast their penny-worths against 
all chanceSy and devised remedies for all mischiefs, then 
the right reverend father in God Thomas, cardinal and le- 
gate, would go see the young emperor newly chosen to the 
room, and have a certain secret communication with some 
of his prelates also. And gat him to Bruges, in Flanders, 
^H^iere he was received with great solemnity, as belongetli 
to so mighty a pillar of Christ's church ; and was saluted 
4t die entering into the town of a merry fellow, which said. 
Salve rex Regis tui, atque regni sui. Hail both king of 
thy king, and ako of his realm. And though there were 
never so great strife between the emperor and the French 
king, yet my lord cardinal juggled him favour of them both ; 
and finally brought the emperor to Calais, to the king's 
grace, where was great triumph, and great love and amity 
shewed on both parties, insomuch that a certain man mar- 
velling at it, asked the old bishop of Durham, how it might 
be that we were so great with the emperor so shortly, upon 
so strong and everlasting a peace made between us and 
the Frenchmen, the emperor and the king of France being 
so mortal enemies ? My lord answered, That it might be 
well enough if he wist all : but there was a certain secret 
(said he) whereof all men knew not. Yea, verily, they 
have had secrets this eight hundred years, which though 
aD the laymen have felt them, yet few have spied them, save 
a few Judases, which for lucre have been confederate with 
diem to betray their own kings and all other. 

Tlienwere we indifferent and stood still ; and the emperor 
and the French king wrestled together ; and Ferdinandus, 
die emperor's brother, won Milan of the Frendimen, and 
the emperor, Toumay, our great conquest; which yet after 
so great cost in building a castle, we delivered up again to 
the Frenchmen, in earnest and hope of a marriage between 
die Dauphin and our princess. 



Prelates. 



Salatatlon. 



Cardinal 
Woliey 
was- a sub* 
tie worker. 



A certain 
secret. 



Milan. 
Toumay. 




400 



IHE PRACTICE 



[TirNU^LI!< 



HOVVTHE EMPEROR CAME THROUGH ENGLAND. 






Nurturing 
of kinfi. 



TUe French 
king ii^nd- 
etti A Jefi 
&n<'e to 
kiag Ut^nnr 

viii. 



Arm id 

went Into 
France* 



^FTI'R that llie emperor would into Spain, and caaie 
through Eiiglaad, where he was received in great 
honour, uud wiUi all that pertaiueth to love and amity. 
The king's grace lent him monev, and promised hbn more: 
and the emperor slionld tarry a certain veal's and marry 
our princess ; not that the cardinal intended thal^ Uiou 
may est be sure ; for it was not profitable for their kingdom : 
but his mind was to dally with the emperor^ and to keep 
liim Mithout a wife, that (insomuch as he was youtig and 
lusty) he might have been noselled and entangled witli 
whores, (which is their nurturing of kings) and made no 
effeminate and beastly^ that he should never have been 
able to lift up his heart to any goodness or virtue ; tliat 
cardinals and bishops might have adminii^tered liis domimons 
in the mean time, unto our holy father's profits 

The king of France hearing the honour that was shewed 
unto llie emiieror, sent immediately a defiance unto our 
king, not without our cardinals' and bishops' counsel thoii 
niayest well wit. For Frenchmen are not so fooUali la 
have done it so unadvisedly and so rashly^ seeing they had 
too many in their tops already* Then our king spake 
many great words, that he wonld drive the French king 
out of his realm, or else the French king should dri%e him 
out of his. But had he added as the legate Pandulph 
taught king John^ with tlie pope's licence, his words had 
sounded much better* For there can no vow stand in 
effect, except the holy father confirmed it. 

We sent out our soldiers two summers against the French- 
men, unto whose chief captains the cardinal had appointed 
how far they should go, and what they should do ; and 
therefore the French king was nothing afraid, but brought 
all his power against the emperor in other places : aiid so 
was the emperor ever betrayed. And tlius the cardinjil 



A 



ik 




\ 



Wis the emperorS frietid openly, aud tiie French kmg*s 
secretly. For at the niei^ting with the French king beside 
CalaiH, he utterly betrayed the emperor, yet for no love that 
he had to France, but to help the pope, and to have been 
pope haply, aad to save their kingdotiK Which treason 
though all the world snielled it, yet it brake not out openly 
to the eye, till the siege of Pavia* And the cardinal lent 
ilie emperor niiich money ojienly, and gave the French 
lung more secretly. He played with botli hands to serve 
Hieir ."secret that all men know not, as the bishop of 
Durham said. But whatsoever the Frenchitien did, they 
had ever the worse, notwithstanding the secret working of 
our holy prelates on their side* 

Finally unto the siege of Pavia came the French king 
personally, with sixty thousand men of war, of which 
twelve thousand were horsemen ; and with money enough* 
And the emperor's host was under twenty thousand, of 
wliich were but three thousand horsemen ; with no money 
at alL For he trusted unto the pope for aid of men, and 
unto our cardinal for money. But the pope kept back 
his men, till the Frenchmen had given them a field ; and 
our cardinal kept back his money for the same purpose* 
And thus was the silly emperor betrayed, as all his prede- 
cessors have been this eight hundred years. Howbeit 
there be that say, that the emperor's soldiers so threatened 
Pace, the king's grace's ambassador, that he was fain to 
make chevisance with merchants, for money in the king's 
name, to pay the soldiers withal. Wherefore the cardinal 
took from him all his promotionsi, and played tormentors 
with him, when he came home; because he presumed to 
do one jot more than was in his commission* But how^- 
soever it was, llie em|>eror's men, in tarrying for help, had 
spent out nil their victuali«* Whereupon Bourbon the 
chief captain of the emperor, said unto his under captains: 
Ye see, help cometh not, and that our victuals are spent ; 
wherefore the^e is no remedy but to fight, though wc be 
unequally matched. If we win we shall find meat enough ; 



'Hie curdi- 
r\al wn» tilt 
emperor'a 
friend 
oiJt?nly*aml 
the French 



The s\rgc 
of Knvis. 



Pari*. 



A fnliic 
pope, nn,l 
lewd carili- 



kins' of 
England *» 

dor. 



Bourbon, 




4G% 



THE PRACTICE 



['lH^*l>A»JJ 



mr setttftb 
upjjti the 
FrtacU 



gliflf I Angela 
0f gol(L 



At the tAk* 

mg^uf tlie 
French 
king Te 
Disum was 
suQg, and 
grrat Cn* 
umpb niHtle 
In England. 



if we lose, we shall ta3e no more than we musl lose mtk 
hunger tliough we fight liot. And io they concluded ta 
set upon the Frenchmen by night. The kittg of Fmtice 
Mud his lords supposing that the tuoon would sooner have 
fallen out of the sky^ tlian that the emperor's host dumt 
have fought with them, were somewhat negligent, and 
went the same tiight a mumming that Bourbon set upon 
them. The emperor's host therefore with their sudden 
coming upon them, amazed the Fretichmen^ and drave 
them upon heaps* together otie on anotlier, so that they 
never could come in array again ; and took the king, and 
divers of his lords, aud slew many and won the field. 
And there came out all the cardinaKs privy treason : for in 
the French king's teut (say men) w ere letters found ; and 
beside tliat, in tlie French king's treasure, and in all the 
host, among the soldiers were English ships found Innu- 
merable, which had come sailing a thousand mile^ by 
land. But what wonder! ships be made to sail over the 
sea ; and wings to fly into far countries, and to mount to 
the top of high hills. 

When the French king was taken, we sang Te Deum. 
But for all that singing we made peace with Frenchmen* 
And the pope, tlie V^enetians, France, and England, were 
knit together; lest the emperor's army should do any 
hurt in France. Whereby ye may conjecture of what 
miiid the pope and the cardinitt were toward the emperor ; 
and with what heart our spiritualty with tlieir invisible se- 
crets, sang Te Deum. And from that time hitherto, the 
emperor and our cardinal have been twain. 

After that when die king of France was delivered home 
again, and his sons left in pledge ; many ways were sought 
to bring home the sons also : but in vain, except the French 
king would make good that which he had promised the 
emperor. For the bringing home of those children, no 
man more busied his wits tlian the cardiaah He would 
in any wise the emperor shoidd have sent them home ; and 
it had been but for our king's pleasure for the great kind- 



TV.XDALK,] 



OF PRELATES. 



4G^ 



Subtle 
prACttcesof 
the cardi- 
nal. 



neas that he shewed him in times past. He would have 

married the king's daughter, our princess, unto the dauphin 

again ; or, as the voice went among many, unto the second 

brother ; and he should have been prince in England, and 

king in time to come : so that he sought all ways to pluck 

118 from the emperor, and to join us unto France, to make 

France strong enough to match the emperor, and to keep 

him down ; that the pope might reign a god alone, and do 

what pleaseth him, without controlling of any overseer, rp^^ ^^^^ 

And for the same purpose he left nothing unprovided to should have 

bring the mart from Antwerp to Calais. Calais. 



WHY THE QUEEN MUST BE DIVORCED. 



TF die cardinal could by such means have made us French, 
the queen had been queen yet ; yea, though she had 
not been hb wife. Neither would he have been more 
about to sepan(te her, than he hath been to separate other 
diat indeed were not his wives, but hath been rather dili- 
gent to couple them to him, to pluck him from his right 
wife : lest if she had been (as right is) in his favour, she 
should have given his grace better counsel for the realm 
than he hath followed ; and lest abo the prince's grace 
^ould have been moved, through her, more to have fa- 
voured the emperor. 

But when there was found not other way, he inspired 
the king that the queen was not hb wife, by the bishop of The bishop 
Lincoln hb confessor : as the saying was, by whom he hath ®' Lincoln. 
breathed many things into his grace, and by whom he hath 
heard hb confession, and by whom, and like hypocrites, he 
hadi long betrayed him to have married him unto the king's 
sister of France, as the fame went, by that means at the 
last to make us French. And then the cardinal's doctors 
laid their heads together to seek subtle arguments and 



464 



THE PRACTICE 



[TvxDArc, 



riddles to prove liis divorcemeut. But all the chance] lori 
of England (say meti) which be all lawyers, and other 
doctors mumpsiinuse^i of divinity were called up suddenly 
to dispute.' the mutter (umkr a colour to condemn Bilney 
and Arthur heard I say) which is thetr old cast and sub- 
tilty to pretend a contrary thing, and to cast a mist before 
the eyes of the people, to hide their juggling ; that no man 
should once surmise whereabout they went. And the car- 
dinal*^ secretaries ministered reasons unto them. And so 
the matter wa;^ dlscuiised with a plain conckjsion that he 
must be divorced. When the queen was warned, she de- 
sired learned counsel to defend her qnarrel, that she should 
have no wrong ; and it was granted her* And she chose, 
but alas what choice is there among the fox's whelps ? All 
that be shaven be sworn together. And all that be pro- 
moted by them must play the Juduses with them* They 
may, to blind the world withal, dispute one against another^ 
but the conclusion shall be the pope^s profit, prelates* 
pleasure, and the lusts of princes, which are tlieir defenders. 
Finally, it is concluded that the queen is not his wife, and 
the cause why tliey be not divorced, is perad venture that our 
prelates are afraid. If they could have brought any mar- 
riage about to join us unto France, it had been done long 
since ; but because tliey cannot (for the Fretich king's sister 
knew too much of Christ to consent unto such wickedness) 
haply they would it were undbne. I doubt not but they 
bear the king's grace in hand tiiaC the po}>e dare not con- 
firm it for fear of the emperor ; but I doubt not, if they 
feared not the emperor and the lords and commons^ it had 
been done already. 

After that my lord cardinal with More, his sworn secre- 
tary, and the bishop of London, that still Satan, the 
imaginer of all mischief, went to France to juggle secretly, 
and carried with him more than he brought home again. 
This is of a trudi that he carried great treasure with him. 
The French gallies lay long in Thame's mouth, and not for 
nought. The fame went plain, yea, and I know^ also one 



TVNDALR.] 



OF PRELATES. 



40' 



thai saw in my lord cardinars court letters sealed with the 
king'a great seal, wherein was contained that the French 
king should have of us money sufficient for to find twenty 
thoiiBaiid men against the emperor in Italy, from the se- 
cond day of July, in the year of our Lord fifteen twenty- 
seveDy forward. 

But among all other, as soon as the pope was taken, the 
cardinal wrote unto the emperor that he should make him 
pope. And when he had got an answer that pleased him 
not, but according unto his deservings toward the emperor, 
then he was furious mad, and sought all means to displease 
the emperor, and imagined this divorcement between the 
king and the queen, and wrote sharply unto the emperor 
with menacing letters that if he would not make him pope 
he would make such ruffling between the princes as was 
not this hundred year, to make the emperor repent : yea, 
though it should cost the whole realm of England. 

The Lord Jesus be our shield. What a fierce wrath of 
God is this upon us that a misshapen monster should 
spring out of a dunghill into such a height that the dread 
of God and man laid apart, he should be so malapert not 
only to defy utterly the majesty of so mighty an emperor, 
mdioae authority both Christ and all his apostles obeyed, and 
tai:q^ all other to obey, threatening damnation to all them 
that would not : but should also set so little by the whole 
realm of England, which hatlf bestowed so great cost and 
shed so much blood, to exalt and maintain such proud, 
chailish, and unthankful hypocrites, that he should not 
cane to destroy it utterly for the satisfying his villanous 
lusts. 

The emperor sent forth a little book in print both in 
Spanbh and also in Dutch, in which he answereth unto the 
cardinal's menacing, and unto many articles that the 
candinal layeth against him, and among all other repeateth 
ibis threatening of the cardinal. Ye will (saith the em* 
peror) to do me displeasure, if 1 will not make you pope, 
set such a ruffling among christian princes as wna not this 

VOL. lU 2 H 



A rnf&er. 



The pride 
and arro* 
gance of 
cardinal 
Wolsey. 



The empe- 
ror wriietU 
against the 
cardinal. 



4m 



THE PRACTICE 



[TyKr>ALH» 



hundred year, though it should cost you the whole reidtit 
of England. W hereunto the emperor answereth, saving, 
Ye go about to give your kiug anotlier wife, which if you 
do, it ciay be the next way to cost you the reahii of Eng- 
land* And 1 believe verily, that the prophecy of thin 
caitilF Caiphas the cardinal, through the mischief that he 
bath wrought for the divorcement of the marriage, shall 
be fultilled, and that it will cost the whole realm of Eng- 
land, if it be not seen to betimes. By what ttieansi 1 will 
show you after that I have spoken a word or two of hia^ 
divorcement. 



OF THE DIVORCEMENT- 



IF the king's most noble grace will needs have an 

wife, then let liim search the laws of God, whether it be 
lawful or not, forasmuch as be himself is baptized to keep 
the laws of God and hath proposed them and hath swoni 
them. If the law of God suffer it, then let his grace put 
forth a little treatise in print, and eveu in the ^iglish 
tongue, that all men may see it, for his excuse and the 
defence of his deed, and say, Lo, by the authority of God s 
word do I this. And then let not his grace be afraid either 
of the emperor, or of his lords, or of his conunons^ and 
subjects. For God hath promised to keep them thai 
keep his laws. If we care to keep his laws, he will can; 
for the keeping of usj for the truth of his promises. If it 
be found unlawful, then let his grace fear God and cease 
to shame himself and his blood, his lords, hjs subjects, and 
his realm, and specially the blessed name of our Saviour 
Jesus Christ, and his holy doctrine, and the profession of 
our faith. For whosoever professeth the faith of Christ 
and liveih contrary unto his doctrine, shametli the name of 
our Saviour Jesus Christ. Moreover, whatsoever Gc 



T%".\DAi.K*] 



OF PRELATES, 



4U7 



coupled man may not loose ^ iio^ though he name himself 
pope. Wherefore if this marriage be of God^ the pope 
cannot dispense with it, for Gud hath given no power against 
liimself : but to preach his ord]naiice.>^ t>nly hath he given 
power. Therefore if we will see what is right and witat is 
wrong, let us bring it unto the light of God's law, and let 
us submit our causes unto the judgment thereof^ and t>e 
content to have our appetites slain tlieruby, tliat we lust 
no farther than God's ordinance giveth us liberty. For 
verily to desire more than God permitteth, is to tempt God, 
find to provoke wTath and indignation upon us, unto our 
destruction, as the children of f srael did under Moseii and 
perished. Whose fro ward deeds are warning for us (saith 
Paul, 1 Cor* X.) that we, feared wilh the terrible ensample 
of their fall, should abstain from like \vickedneases. 

The controversy and strife of the matter and all the 
doubt and ditBculty standeth in this : tliat Moses in die 
xviiith of Leviticus saith. Thou shall not unheal the secrets 
of thv broriiers wife, for they are thy brother's secrets* 
Which is as much as to say, as thou shalt not take thy bro- 
ther's wife. And in the xxvth of Deut. he saith, That if 
I a man die without issue, his brother must marry his wife, 
Vhich two texts seem contrary, the one forbidding, the 
atber commanding, a man to take his brother's wife. Where- 
fore that we may come uuto the true sense and clear 
meaning of these two texts, and that we may perceive also 
the ground of the reason that may be made by both par- 
ties by the occasion of these texts, and see which reasons 
do conclude, ye shall understand that the law^ of Moses is 
divided into three parts. Part of his laws are ceremonies, 
that is to say, signs that put men in remembrance either of 
the benelits of God done already, as the Easter lamb ; either 
signs of the promise and appointment made between God 
and man, a« circumcision ; or signs that testify unto tlie 
people that the wrath of God is peuced, and their sins for- 
given, as all manner of sacrifices : which al! cease as soon 
as Christ had offered up the sacrifice of his body and blood 
2 n 2 



'Hie pope 
hnth nonu* 
thority 



'Hie caiuQ 
tLiat 

maketh tbe 
doubt, 
whether a 
(iia.li mny 
tiiftrry \m 
brolher's 
wife. 



4G8 



THE PRACTICE 



[TtKHAJ-P, 



TUe Iaif 



of 



Tlie Iaw 
tijitur«l. 



All lllWA 

ipi i/ig out 
Qf one. 



for us* And insteikcl of them come the open preachittg of 
Christ, and our signs which we ca}l sacramenta, 

Another liort are laws of penalty or punishment to avenge 
sin if it break out and hurt a inarfii neighbour, as tooth for 
tooth, eje for eye, and that the blood-shedder must have 
his blood shrd again , and the breaker of wedlock must be 
stoned : which laws were given imlo tiie Jews only, and 
we heathen or Gentiles are not bound unto them, that we 
should punish every sin after the same manner ; but it in 
enough t]iat every land punish their trespassers as tt seemeth 
best for the commonvvealtii there, some of one mantier and 
some of another* 

Another part pertain unto failli and love ; and that a 
mun believe how that there is but one God, aud that he 
is true, good and merciful in all things ; aJid therefore 
ought to be believed, trusted and loved with all a man's 
heart, soul, mind and strength : and that a man love as 
himself for God's sake which hath created him and made 
him« And this is the law of nature, and pertaineth unto 
all nations indifferently with all that dependelh or fol- 
loweth thereof. This law was also before Moses : inso- 
much that though Moses had never written it, yet had the 
Jews been no less bound thereto by nature and by natural 
right and equity. For whosoever is of God^ the same 
consenteth unto his law, and unto ail that followTth 
thereof natural, when he heareth it preached, as he con- 
sented that tlie fire is hot, when he putteth his finger 
in it- 

Moreover, whosoever hath this law graven in his heart, tliis 
same keepeth all laws, and whosoever hath it not written in 
his heart, the same keepeth no law. For wliosoever believeth 
that there is one God, and loveth him with all his heart, with 
ail his soul, mind and strength , (which is the first of the ten 
commandments pertaining unto the person of Gotl) the 
same will worship tiothing of his own imagination with- 
out God's word : and then he can make none image to 
worship il. Which is the second commandment per- 



Tyndalb.] of prelates. 469 

taining unto the person of God. He cannot also for very 
Ipve sake take the name of God in vain, and swear by it 
iiiureverently : and so thou hast the third commandment 
pertaining unto the person of God. Furthermore, he 
that believeth God, and hath his trust only in him, and 
loveth him as I said, cannot but keep his holy day, not 
after Moses's fiashion, but spiritually : that is, he cannot 
but observe a time to wait on Gpd's word, to hear it, and 
l^un it, and to knowledge his sin before God, and to de- 
sire him of his mercy, according to his promises and 
testament which he hath made with us : and so thou, hast . 
the fourth commandment pertaining unto the person of 
Grod. Last of all, he that so loveth God cannot dis- 
obey father and mother, in which two names are contained 
all high powers; as grandfather, grandmother, aunt, 
uncle, king, lord, master, husband, and so forth, per- 
sons here in God's stead, by wliich he made us, and by 
which he feedeth us, clotheth us, govemeth us, teacheth 
and niledi us. And thus thou hast the five command- 
meota, which all pertain unto the person of God. For 
the obedience of father and mother, and of all high 
power? which rule the world in God's stead, pertaineth 
unto the person of Grod, and must be done with love as 
unto God's self. 

Furthermore, he that loveth God, hath this command- 
m/exki also, that he love his brother or neighbour, in the 
fourth chapter of the first Epistle of John. For how can 
a man love the father, and hate the son, whom the father 
loveth? Even so how canst thou love God the Creator, 
and hate that creature whom he hath created and made 
after his own likeness ; and so loveth him, that he hath 
made him lord over all other creatures, and thereto hath 
given his own Son unto the death, for his sake, to shew 
him kindness, that he might so love, and to love again ? 
How can I love our Saviour Jesus Christ, and hate him 
whom he hath bought with his blood ? Though the son 
be never so evil, yet if 1 love iiis father heartily, 1 cannot 



470 



THE PHACTICE 



[Ty3«iiAi.«, 



SoUltlOTII. 



aiea baire 
Higni flea- 
lions 



but be sicjrry that the aon is evil, and wbli him gocnl iii 
mine heart, and help to the uttermost of my power. 
Kveii so, though my neiglibour be never so evil, yet as 
toiig as I love God^ and Christ our Saviour, with all mine 
heart, I cannot but love him, and help to better him witli 
nil my power ^ until he run stj far, that he beginneth to 
Jight ugainst God, and to destroy the law of God, and 
the testament that God hath made unto man. Then I 
hritc and dishonour God the make thereofi If 1 break it 
resist him with all my power, as God hath taught me to 
resiit. 

Now if 1 love my neighbour in God faithfully and un* 
feignedly, then 1 cannot find in my heart to slay him ; 
neither to defile his wife : neither to steal his goods : nor 
to bear false witness against him : neither can mine heart 
covet his house, wife, man-servant or maid from him, 
either ox, ass, or whatsoever is his. And thus hast thou 
other five of the ten commandments, pertaining all unto 
the person of thy neighbour. This is the law of nature, 
whose servants Moses and the prophets were, to teach it 
the Jews, and whose servant Christ our Saviour was, for 
oursakes, with his apostles, to teach it us. And it is an 
«.verlasting law, and pertaineth indifferently to all nations, 
with all that hangetli thereof; insomuch that though a 
man be never taught it, yet if it be not found written in 
his he ait, he is the heir of damnation. 

Now they that study to make this divorcement between 
ihe king's grace and the queen, will haply say, that the first 
text is a law^, depending of which law natural, (for un- 
doubted It is no ceremony, nor yet law of penalty) and 
therefore pertaineth unto all men indifferently, and ought 
to be kept of all nations ; and that the second is a cere- 
mony, and therefore ceaseth at the coming of Clu-isl. I 
auiwer : If it be a ceremony, then it is a sign, and must 
have a signitication. It must signify some benefit of God 
done already, or some vengeance taken for stn, or some 
promise, or something that I uiuhI do or leave undone al 



Tyndalb.] of prelates. 471 

the commaodinent of God. Now the signification of it 
they will shew me when our lady hath a new son. 

Moreover, there is no ceremony of Moses, but that 1 ceremonies 
may keep it this day as an indifferent thing ; howbeit, not ^ made of 
aa a thing so necessary unto my soul's health, that I should things. 
think that I sinned if I did not. But I may eat the Easter 
lamb of passover every year, when the time cometh, if I 
wilL And I may circumcise myself for my pleasure, as 
wdl as pare my nails, if I list. And I may burn the 
Uood and fat of oxen and calves unto this day without 
sin, as an indifferent thing ; and give this signification 
diereto, that as the fat consumeth in the fire, even so doth 
the sin of all men that repent consume in the hot fire of 
the love of God to usward, in Christ Jesus the Lord ; and 
so £ordi. If it be a ceremony, then, how happeneth it that 
this one ceremony is unlawful among all other ? 

Thereto, inasmuch as Moses in all his laws sought the 
gloiy of God, and the pureness of his people, as he 
boastetfaof himself, (Deut. iv.) saying, What nation hath 
ordinances and laws so righteous as all this law, which I 
set before you ! How cometh it that Moses was driven 
iota so great a strait, that he would find nought to make 
a ceremony of, but that which of his ovim nature is danma- 
ble and filthy among the heathen, which heathen made as 
just laws out of the law natural graven in their hearts, as 
Moses did. Might not the heathen of good right say : 
See what a filthy nation it is, they marry every one his 
brother's wife, as hounds. And so the law shamed the 
name of Grod, and honoured it not. If Moses gave his 
people two contrary commandments, then he was an in- 
discreet lawgiver, yea, and devilish thereto. For then I 
cannot but be damned whatsoever I do. If a man say 
that the first pertaineth unto us heathen, and the last unto 
the people of Israel, that soundeth not ; for when all the 
other laws contained in the same chapter, and in all his 
bodLS, pertained unto the same people, how should he, 
among so many belonging unto them, mingle one for us 




4rt 



THE PRACTICE 



[TrxuALic* 



Iteatliet) only, lo wham he was no lawgiver; and 
jraniely^ when he wint that one as wbe as he 
.should come and teach ns^ which is our Saviour Jesus 
Christ. 

If a titan will say, the ^rst in a law, and the second a 
permisiion, bb the permissioti of divorcemetils, when a 
man did hale his wife : nay, veriH, it is not a penni!*§ion, 
but a Hat command, and that under pain of great ^hame 
and rebuke unto the man, if he did it not^ and under the 
loss of all her husband's possession unto the woman, if 
she offered not herself* Of which law, also, because 
thou needest not to dream of a ceremony, a man may 
shew a good natural reason, profitable unto the common- 
wealth. For a woman when she is married, she for^aketh 
her father's kin, and bringelh her dowty witli ber^ mud 
taketh her name among her husband's kin< Now if her 
husband die childless, it is not reason that she should be 
dit out of the kin empty, neither i« it right that she 
should carry her husband's possessions out of his kin 
away with her, and that a stranger should get a child of 
her, to possess them* Thou wilt tay that the lands 
might return unto the next of his kin, and the wife have 
a portion her life long only. Then should great posse- 
sions come into the hands of one man, and so should 
there many tyrants rise among the people. Which lo 
avoid, God ordained that the lands should be scattered 
even among as many as might be of the same kin, and 
for the same cause would suffer no man to buy any lands 
for ever- For Gtxl tliinketh it better for his common- 
wealth, that twenty should spend twenty or forty shillings, 
than that one should spend twenty or forty pounds, and 
nineteen tiever a whit : far then must many poor hang on 
one rich ; which rich for the most part be of corrupt 
minds, and so sensual that they wiU look of no m&n to 
do him gi>od, except it will be on such as will follow 
their lusts* And so should the people follow the will of 
matif and not of God^ and be compelled to live wickedly, 



Tvnuale] 



OF FMELATES. 



473 



I 



and to murder, steal, and oppres^s ibeir brethjen, to till 
their bellies wittial. 

Moreover, it was a law in the time uf the kw natunil, 
four hundred veers before Moses, that a man should 
marrv his brother's wife, a^ thou seest Genesis x^wiii. 
Also, Moses tbrbjddeth not a man, when his wife is 
dead| to marry her sislur* If one man marry two sisters, 
why may not one woman marry two brethren I Are not 
two sisters as nigh of kin as two brethren ? 

Wherefore I see no remedy, but that a man must under- 
stand tlie text thus : That Mosesi furbiddetli a man to 
take hid brother's wife as long as his brother Ii\eth : as in 
the text following, when he forbiddeth a niau to take his 
neighbour's wife, he meaneth while his neighbour liveth* 
For after his death it is lawful. And therefore John re- 
buked Herod for taking his bro therms wife from him, his 
brother being yet alive* Or at the uttermost, if they will 
strive and shew no cause why, it can extend no further 
than that a man may not take his brother's wife^ if he have 
issue by her. Which I suppose an indiflerent thing to 
have her or not^ as they can agree : but if liis brother die 
childless, then he ought to have her, and yet she b 
bound to offer herself to the other brother by the law of 
Moses, and that it is lawful now, though no command- 
ment. 

If it be understood of a man's brother's wife, he being 
alive, then haply ye will say that it is superfluously added 
of Moses ; for it is included in that which foUoweth imme- 
diately, that a man shall not take his neighbour's wife. 
Nay, verily ; for it h another sin, and a more greater sin 
for a man to take his brother's wife than his neighbour's Hife 
diat is no kin to him ; because tliat my neighbour's shame is 
not my shame. For let my neighbour be hanged, and no 
man ca^itetli ihat in my teeth. But my brother's shame is my 
shame, and the shame of my father and mother, and of all my 
kin. For let whatsoever rebuke it be chance my brother, and 
it is cast in my teeth, and in the teeth of my father and mother, 



Uow the 

tejiC II to 




THE FBACTICE 



[TVKDALK, 



and i»r all my kin iinmedialdj. VVherefon?^ to be aa 
fbrget/ul of natural houesty^ that 1 sbouKl defile my bro- 
ther's wife uato mine own shanie and mil my kin, h more 
grievous and heinous, (as they say) aod springe th of 
gieiiter lewdnessit or niahce, than to take my neighbour's 
wife winch is not of my kin^ And this doth the xxth 
chapter of the said Lt!viticua prove, were Moses saith, If 
a man We with his brother*!i wife, they shall die imme- 
diately, and not tarry tlie birth. As Judah would have 
burnt Tamar, his daughter-in-law, being yet great with 
child, (Gen* xxxviii*) 

They will haply say also, that if it be to be understood 
of a man's brother, while his brother liveth: then tliey 
will understand of the father's and uncle's wives also, 
while the father and uncle live. Nay, verily, it is far un* 
like. For my fa therms wife and mine nude's wife are my 
superiors, and persons unto whom 1 owe ol>edieuce by 
tlie means of my father and uncle. Now if 1 should 
marry tbem^ tlien I should make them my servants^ for the 
wife must obey her husband ; and so permit 1 the law of 
nature aud natural equity, and honesl^. Ye will say that 
when my father and uncle be dead, the obedience is loosed. 
Verily, it might well stand with the pope's doctrine, for he 
thrusteth kings down and emperors thereto, and exalteth 
their sworn subjects into their rooms : he raketh one out of 
the dunghill on the one day, and out of the most low and 
vile kind of subjection, and maketh him on the morrow 
superior unto his own prince, and to all the laws of his 
realm in worldly pomp and dignity. But God teachetb 
his children to humble themselves. And Christ teacheth 
his disciples to come lower and lower. I suppose, there- 
fore, that a man ought much more to do them service, 
and obey them, and to give them honour and reverence 
now after the deaths of their husbands, than before. More- 
over, ye see that a man may not marry his daughter-in-law 
after his son's death, by the story of Judah. (Gen. xxiii.) 
And again, ye see that David, after the death of his son 



^ 



Tyndalk.] 



OF PRELATES, 



475 



Absalom, would not meddle with His own wives , which 
his soil had before corrupt ; but ^hut them up in per- 
petual widowhood* Now if the father, after tlie death of 
his son, abstaiu fn>m her that was one flesh with his ^ion 
for natural reverence ; how much more ought tlie son ^ 
after the death of hii^ father, to abstain from her tliat was 
one rtesh with his father, to whom also, by the reason 
of his father, he oweth obedience thereto ? 

Moreover, if a woman should tiud a man-child by the 
streets, and bring him in, and find him up of nought i 
I would not by my will that she should after marry with him, 
for perverting of due obedience, which she should haply as 
iinnatu rally, even so shrewdly give unto him again. If 
she obeyed not, with what face sliould he correct her? 
If be corrected her, what would she cast in his teeth, and 
what wondering would neighbours make ? What reverence 
and service then suppose ye won Id nature (if we were not 
so corrupt minded) teach us to give unto the father's and 
uncle's %vife ? 

And to go through all the degrees that are forbidden ; 
the mother, grandmother, aunts, father's wife and uncle*s 
wife, are persons to be obeyed as God, with all reverence 
and service. The daughter and daughter's daugbteri and 
son's daughter, are a man's wife's flesh. The wife's 
mother and grandmother are persons to be obeyed, be- 
sides tliat the wife is your flesh. Now between a man 
and his wife's sister when she is dead, and his brother*s 
wife when his brother is dead^ is there no such cause as 
between these |>ersoiis. 

And concerning the maid-children, though they be 
under the obedience of their uncles ; yet because if 
any be married unto her uncle, she bideth in obe- 
dience stiU ; therefore it is not utterly forbidden. And 
ensamples there be, that maidens have married unto 
their uncles : which thing yet 1 could not have drawn 
into a common use without necessity, or for a common- 
wealth. 



476 



THE PRACTICE 



tTYXLPAl^B, 



A nd conc^miiig the sister ; she is of equal birtli to her 
brother. It is to be fe;ired, therefore, lest her obedieDce 
would be les3 to her brother than to u iitraiiger. Then 
note tJie grief of father and mother, if they agreed not- 
Moreover, if he were an unkind husband, tlieu had she 
double sorrow ; first, because he is unkind, and also be- 
cause she hath lost the comfort of a brother. Then the 
^miliar bringing up together. And beside all Uiose and 
such like^ there is jet another, (which I tliink the chiefest 
of alt) that the sending out of daughters into another 
kill, and receiving again out of another kin, is the greatest 
cause of peace and unity that is in the world. And, tiiere- 
fore, the heathen people forbad that degree in the laws- 

Nevertheless, the marriage of the brother >^ ith ibe sister 
b not so grievous against the law of nature (thinketh me) 
as the degrees above rehearsed , And, therefore, it seemeth 
nie, that it might be dispensed with in certain cases, ajid 
for divers considerations. It would be hard to prove that 
Sarah was not Abraham's sister, whom I think he mar- 
ried because there were none other faithful women that 
believed in God^ Moreover, the greatest cause to send 
the daughter out, is unity and peace between diven 
kindreds. 

Wherefore, if greater peace and unity might be made 
with keeping her at home, I durst dispense with iL As 
if the king of England had a son by one wife, heir to 
Englatidj and a daughter by another, heir to Wales: 
then, because of the great war that was ever wont to be 
between those two countries, I would not fear to marry 
them together, for the making of a perpetual unity, and 
to make both countries one, for to avoid so great effusion 
of blood. For which cause, 1 would God that our priiK 
cess had been married unto the king of Scots. And I 
doubt not but that had it been concluded long ago, if it 
had been as greatly unto the profit of the pope and his 
ptl pates ; I would say prelale^ ; as it were to tlie honour 
of God. But it is not profitable for them tJiat any king- 



Tyndalr-] of prelates. 477 

dom should be strong and mighty, lest if God should open 
the eyes of the king, the pope should have too much ado 
to resist him, and to send in other kings upon him, to 
conquer his realm. 

1 did my diligence a long season, to know what reasons 
our holy prelates should make for their divorcement, but 
I could not come by them ; I searched what might be 
said for their part, but I could find no lawful cause of 
myself, by any Scripture that I ever read ; I communed 
with divers learned men of the matter, which also could 
tell me no other way than I have shewed. Then I con- 
sidered the falsehood of our spiritualty, how that it is but 
their old practice, and a common custom ; yea, and a 
sport to separate matrimony, for to make division where 
such marriage made unity and peace. Wherefore I could 
not but declare my mind, to discharge my conscience 
withal; which thing I had done long since, if I could 
have brought it to pass. Howbeit, 1 had lever now do 
it at the last, than that any man should cast me in the 
teeth in time to come, when this old marriage were 
broken, and a new made, why I had not spoken rather ? 
Neither can the king's grace, or any other Christian man 
of right be discontent with me. For it is not possible 
that any person baptized in the heart with repentance of 
evil ; and with faith of forgiveness in the blood of Christ, 
and stedfast purpose and profession of heart, to walk 
henceforth after the steps of Christ, in the law of God, 
shou^ 1 once desire or will to do ought openly with long 
deliberation, that he would not have compared with the 
law of God, to see whether it were right or not. 

Some man might haply say, that though a great man 
would be content to have his deeds compared unto die 
laws of God, he would disdain yet to have so vile a wretch 
as I am, to dispute of them. 

I answer, that it is not my fault, but God's, which for 
the most part even chooseth of the vilest, to confound the 
glorious, which not only clothed his Son with our vile 



47S 



THE miACTICE 



[I'VNPALIt. 



nature, but made hmi also of the verj^ lowest sort of mail, 
e?en iive hundred steps beneatli the degree of a cardioal, 
and sent him to rebuke the scribes and the phansees 
which sat on Moses' seat, for Uieir evil doing ajid false 
doctrine, besides the law of Monies, And the glorious 
scribes and the pharisees, for all their holine^ss^ rebuked 
not Herod, nor Caiphas and Anna for all their higlines^ ; 
but vile John tlie Baptist. By what authority I Verily, 
by the autliority of God*s word ; which only, whatsoever 
garment she wear, ought to have all authority among 
them lliat have professed it. That word is tlie chiefe^t of 
tlie apostles and pope, and Christ^s vicar, and head of the 
church, and the head of tlie general council. And unto 
the authority of that ought the children of God to hearken 
without respect of person, for they that are of God^ hear 
God's word* (John vi,) And Christ's sheep hear Clu-jst^s 
voice; (John x,) yea, thougti he spe^ by a c^lf> 

Ye will haply say, my reasons be not good. They may 
be the sooner solved, and shall thereto make tlie contrary 
part better, and set it out, and make it appear to all 
men's sight, and stablish it; and so they shall do good 
evei^ way. 



BY WHAT MEANS THE DIVORCEMENT SHOULD 
COST THE REALM, 



]^OW to that I promised, how that I would shew you 
by what means this marriage might cost the realm of 
England, according to Caiphas, the cardinal's blind pro- 
phecy. This is first as sure as the winter followeth the 
summerj that our prelates have utterly determined that 
this marriage that is between the king and the (jueen must 
be broken ; and so Is the princess disinherited, and tlie 
king of Scots next t<* the crown. And we may fortune to 



TvNMlALIv.] 



OF rRELATES. 



470 



find one at home^ which because he is near hand, would 
look to step in before himj and it may chance tliereto 
that another yet will look to come in us soon as any of 
both : perad venture J the third born at home may make 
friends likewise ; yea, and so fortli. And then while ye 
shed each other's bloixl, our prelates will ^iit and laugh, 
and look upon you out of sanctuary ; and when every man 
hath done his best^ they will tliiuk to make tlieui a de- 
fender wheresoever shall please them best. 

The king's grace , will ye say, shall have another wife, 
and she shall bear him a prince^ and be shall break strife^ 
Wlio hath promised him a prince ? Moreover, if his 
new marriage be not well proved, and go fortli witli good 
authority, so shall we yet follow the princess still ; or if 
she be sent another way, some other whom we shall suppose 
more righteous inheritor ; and so the new prince is like to 
go after king lieniy of Windsor's princej and king Edward's 
children. 

And I will tell you yet another sport. As soon as the 
cardinal had sent tlie emperor a defiance, and upon defi- 
ance had arrested the emperor's ships in England^ and our 
ships and men were arrested also in all regions of the emperor ; 
then went the common fame throughout all Dutcliland^ 
that the emperor's counsel, Holland, Brabant and Zea- 
land, had determined , if die wai- liad proceeded^ to have 
set lip the king of Denmark that was, to have challenged 
his right in England. For the Danes challenge England, 
as we challenge France, and the king of Denmark writeth 
himself king of haigland, as our king writeth himself king 
of England and France. And this once i the old king of 
Denmark^ with his son, a goodly prince^ if he had lands, 
shall never come in Deum^rk again, of any likelihood. 
Wherefore, if ye fall together by the ears, may he not by 
some chance, if God be angry with you, make an ap- 
pointment with the king of Scots to come in upon you t>n 
the one side, and make for his part what friends he can in 
Dntchland, and send nilto the new king of Denmark, and 





4KO 



THE PRACTICE 



[TrxpAi.K, 



give up his titJe for ever to get rid of liiiii, so to come in ou 
the other side, and conrjuer you ? And twenty oilier ways 
are ye like to come in danger, which I commit unto your 
owii cousideration. 



THE PUITING I>OVVN OF THE CARDINAL. 



n greht 



cotrimiteth 

fifalfwt the 
cmperar. 



A ND finally concerning the card! uaPs putting down, I 
consider many things. First, that I never heard or read 
that any man, being so great a traitor^ wa^ so easily put to 
death. Then the natural di<j position and inctinatiou of the 
man, how that his chief study^ yea, and all his felicity and in- 
ward joy, hath ever been to exercise that angePs wit of his 
(as my lord of Lincoln was w out to praise him) in driving 
of such drifts to begude all men^ and to bind the whole 
world withaL Wherefore I can none otherwise judge by 
an hundred tokens, evident unto whomsoever hath a na- 
tural wit, hut that this is also nothing save a cast of his old 
practice ; so that when God had wrapped him in his own 
wiles that he ^vist not which way out, (for the emperor pre- 
vailed for all the cardinal's treason, and the French children 
might not come home : and he had learned also of his ne- 
cromancy, that this would be a jeopardous year for him,) 
what for the treason that he had wrought against the 
emperor, and what for the money which he had bor- 
rowed of the commons, lest any rising should be against 
him, then he thought to undo his destiny with his 
policies, and went and put down himself under a colour 
(which the process of the tragedy well declaretli) and ^el 
up in his room to miuister forth, and to fight against Ciod 
as he had begun, tlie chiefest of all liis secretaries, one 
notliing inferior unto bis master in lying, feigning, and 
bearing two faces in one hood ; a whelp that goeth not 
out of kind from his sire ; the chiefest stale wherewith Uie 
cardinal caught the king's grace^ whom he called unto the 
confirmation of all that he intended to persuade ; saying, 




Ttnojile,] 



OF PRELATES, 



4BI 



Kit is like four grace. Mare U u learned maiij aad knoweUi Cnj^dio*! 
nd is utso a iayman, wherefore lie will not sny other- 



it, 



preft*rred 
Mqix* Co tie 
chaocellor. 



wine lliaii it is^ for any partiality to us ward. Which se- 
cretary yet must first deserve it with writing against 
Martitij and against the Obedience aod Mammon^ and 
become tlie proctor of purgatory^ to write agaiust the sup- 
plication of beggars. 

And then^ to blind the world withal, m&nyquarreU were Treasori 
picked : the cardinal might not speak with the king's grace, CHriliujii'/ 
tlie broad aeal was fetched away, higli treason was laid to his clwirge^ 
charge. First, that he breathed (heard I say) in the 
king's face when he had tlie French pox : (O hypocrites!) 
but the very treason that he had wrought was not spoken 
of at all, nor aught worthy of a traitor done to him .at alU 

Then they called a parliament (as though tlie golden 
world should come again) wherein the hypocrites, to blear 
men's eyes withal, made a reformation of mortuaries, and Mortunriet, 
probates of testaments : the root yet lert benmd whence all testamentH* 
that they have for a time weeded out will spring again by 
little and littie as before, if tliey, as their hope h, may stop 
tills light of God's word that is now abroad* They made ^"/*f>'i«» 
also a reformation of pluralities of beneficesi ordammg acei. 
that liencefortli no man may come by plurality of benefices 
with lirtue and cunning, but with serving for them in the court- 
Which what other thing is it save plain simony ? O blind bu;£- 
zards and shameless hypocrites, what care they to do, 
whether against God or their own laws, to flatter great men 
withal and to blind theni 1 But hark here ; the tithes Tiibe». 
were ordained at tlie beginning to fintl the preachers and Tlieclmrcli* 
the poor people which now go a begging ; ho that the w*»^d^»" 
church-wardens ought to take the beneuces mto their jiecuMoim-d 



benefices 

hands in the name of the parish , and deliver the preacher Jj|^f*^'j^^^ 

of Gfxl*H word their dwelling, aod present a suHicient and to i^w 

living, and divide die rest among the poor people. And J^J^ ^J!^^ 

the king is bound to maintain that order, and not to resist t^^^*^ f^ti- 

them except he will be an open tyrant. Now I appeal to to^re tin 
the consciences of the king's grace and of !iis lords. 



VOL, IK 



tlie 
What «*ttoLi»* 




^s^ 



THE PRACTICE 



tTTHAAIbB, 



l.jive lierc 
mycli to 



The lam 
first p!»r- 

the rlergf. 



Tlic loan 
forij»Ti'ii by 
ihc (Pinpo- 
rjiltr. 



Kimftrtc of 
Durtmin, 



answer \iiU they give when tbey come before Oirist iti the 
last judgineut^ for their robbing of 50 many sou U iti so many 
parishes of God's word, with holding every^ man so many 
chaplains in their houses witii pluralities of beneticee, and 
for the robbing of so many poor and needy of their 
due and daily food ; whose need, for lack of succour, crieth 
to God contiiuially for vengeance against them, which we 
see daily by a thinmaud misforttines fall on them, and oti 
their wives and children* Let them read Exodus and Deute- 
ronomy and net what they find there. Yea, and what 
shall so many chaplains do ? first slay their souk, and dieu 
defile their wives, their daughters, and their maidens, and 
last of all betray tliem* 

When this I'eformation, the colour and cloak of their by- 
pocri»y, was niude^ then tlie spiritualty came ducking lie- 
fore the king\s grace, and forgave him the mone\ which they 
had lent their pope to bring ni tlie temporal ty ; and to 
make them after their ensample to do likewise, as loving 
subjects, and no less kitid unto their prince thati the spi- 
ritually. For their arses were upon thonis" till the loan 
was forgiven, for fear of afterclaps. Whereupon the tem- 
poral ty forgave their part also in hope of that they ob- 
tained not. For m soon m the loan was forgiven the par- 
liament broke up ; because our prelates and their con- 
federate friends had found that they sought and caught the 
fish for which they laid the bait, of all those faces of re- 
formations ; and for which the cardinal, to bring the world 
into a fool's paradise, was compelled even with his own 
good will to resign his chancellorship, and Uiat to whom 
he listed himself. And as for Uie bishopric of Durham^ 
to say the very truth, he could not of good congrutty hut 
reward his old chaplain^ and one of the chief of all bis se- 
cretaries withal J still Satan, that so seldom speaketh^ but 
walketlt up and down all day musing and imagining mis- 
chief, a ducking hypocrite, made to dissemble. 

Which, for what service done in Christ's gospel, came he 
to the bishopric of Ijoudon ; or what such service did he 



Tynualk.] 



OP PRBLATES. 



4S3 



therein ? He burnt the New Testament, calling it doc^ 
trinam perigrinam, strange learning. Yea, yerily, look 
how strange his living, in whose blood that Testament was 
made, was from the living of the pope ; even so strange is 
that doctrine from the pope's law, in which only, and in 
the practice thereof, is Tonstal learned. Which also for 
^at cause left he the bishopric of London ? even for the 
same cause he took it after that he had long served for 
it, covetousness and ambition. Neither is it possible na- 
turally, that diere should be any good bishop, so long as 
die bUioprics be nothing save worldly pomp and honour, 
superfluous abundance of all manner [of] riches, and liberty 
to do what a man listeth unpunished ; things which only 
the evil desire, and all good men abhor. 

And as soon as the parliament was ended, the cardinal 
bad his charter and gat him home ; and all bishops gat 
him every fox to his hole; leaving yet their attomies 
behind diem, to come again themselves as soon as the con- 
steDation is somewhat overrun, whereof they be afraid. 



Tonstal 
bisliop of 
Durham 
burnt the 
New Testn- 
ment. 



A bishopric 
iH a super- 
fluous ho- 
nour add A 
lewd li- 
berty. 

The cardi- 
nal clearly 
discharged. 



WHAT THE CAUSE OF ALL THIS MISCHIEF IS. 



l^HENCE Cometh all this mischief? verily it is the 
hand of God, to avenge the wantonness of great men, 
which will walk without the fear of God, following the 
steps of the high prelates, contrary unto their profession, 
and to avenge also the wrongs, the blasphemies and subtle 
persecuting of his word. 

For when Martin Luther had uttered the abominations 
of the pope and his clergy, with God's word, and divers 
books were come into England, our cardinal thought to 
find a remedy against that well enough, and sent to Rome 
for diis vain title. Defender of the faith ; which the vicar of 
Croydon preached, that the king's grace would not lose 
for all London and twenty miles round about it. Neither 
is it marvel, for it had cost more tliau London and 

2 I 2 



Defender 
of the 
faith. 



484 



THE PRACTICE 



LTyx0Ai-B, 



Tilt lUle of 
tilt! de* 
ft^ndef of 
ttie THllh 
^mnt fraiu 
Rome. 



TIjc popiih 
an it v&lti 

maimer of 
<y( cardm^vl 
\ Vol sty » 



Tlic canli- 



and VKitiest 
card inn I 
tbal ever 



Tlie cUurcti 
rrrt'th, if 

And bisihofB 
he the 
cUiircli, 



forty tuiles about it U able to tnake ( I think) at Uib hour ; 
beside the effusion of inaoceiit blood that ^vas offered unto 
the idol, and ilaily i** offered thereto. When tills glorious 
name was come from our liolv father, tlie cardinal brought 
it unto the king's grace at Greenwich. x\ad lliough tfie 
king li ad it aheady and had read it, yet against the monnng, 
uere all tlie lorcU and gentlemeu that could in so short 
space be gathered together, sent for^ to come and receive it 
witfi honour. And in the morning after, the cardinal gal 
him through the back s^ide into Uie friar observants. And 
pa it of the gentles \^ent round about and welcomed him 
from Rome, as representing the pope's person ; part met 
him half way, part at tlic court gate, and last of all iJie 
king's grace himself met him in the hall, and brought him 
up into a great chamber, where wa^ a seat prepared on 
high for the king's grace and the cardinal, while the bull was 
read ; insomuch, that not the wise only, but men mean of 
understanding, laughed the vain pomp to scorn, not far un- 
like to the receiving of the carditial'd hat. Which when a 
ruffian hath brought unto him to Westminster tmder his 
cloak, he clothed the messenger in rich array and sent Imn 
back to Dover again ; and appointed the bishop of 
Canterbury to meet him, and then another company of 
lords and gentles, I wot not how oft, ere it came to 
W^estminster ; where it was set on a cupboard and tapers 
about, so that the greatest duke in the land must make 
courtesy thereto, yea, and to his empty seat, he being 
away. 

And shortly, for lack of authority of God's word, 
Martin must be condemned by the authority of the king. 
And the king's grace, to claw tlie pope again, must make 
a book, in which to prove all that they would have stab- 
lished, for lack of Scripture, yea, and contrary to llie 
open Scripture, is made this mighty reason ; such prelates 
are the church, and the church cannot err, and therefore, 
M that they do is right, and we ought to bebeve tliem 
\iithout any Scripture, yea, and though the Scripture be 



rYK'OAl^K.] 



OF PRELATES. 



4m 






lit rary • W herefore , Gml ( o ffe iid ed w i th s iic li bl aj^ p t le my , 

make lii» enemies feet that they would tiot »ee in the 
0|>en Scripture, nor in the practice of their livings and 
doings J clean contrary unto the Scripture, and unto the 
living of Christ, aud his apostles, thid eight hundred 
years,) hath poured his wrath upon us, and hath snared the 
>vise of the world with the subtilty of their own wits. For 
ilher the pope and cardinab with other prelates that made 
this 6rst marriage J or tliey that would break it, err, to upeak 
no more grievously. 

Moreover, when Martin Luther had submitted himself 
ill an epistle, let his grace consider what answer he gave 
again* Where is the glory of the great praise become, 

at his grace gave the cardinal for his goodly acts, and 
benefits which all ihe common wealth of the whole realm 
jhould feel ? And let his grace remember how he invcigh- 
ith against Martin's wedlock^ and fear lest God, to avenge 
wilful blindness, tangle his grace with matrimony (beside 
tilt: destruction of the realm that is like to follow) mtich 
more dishonourable than his grace thinketh Martin 
shameful. His grace promised to keep hij wedlock as 
well as Martin did his chastity: and his grace's vow^ hath 
authority of God, and Martin's not, but is damned by the 
word of God aa he did vow, and as the hypocrites do yf t 
teach to vow. 

And More among his other blasphemies in his dialogue 
saith^ that none of us dare abide by our faith unto the 
death : but shortly thereafter, God, to prove More, that he 
hath ever been a false liar, gave strength unto his servant, 
ir Thomas Hitton, to confess, and that unto the death, 
^e faith of his holy Son Jesus ; which Thorn as j the 
bishops of Canterbury and Rochester, after they had 
dieted and tornieuted him secretly^ murdered at Maidstone 
most cruelly* 

I beseech the king's most noble grace, therefore, to 
consider jdl the ways by which the cardinal and our holy 
bishops have led liini, since he was first king; and to see 



Martm 

Lutlter 

king 

Nenry 

VUL 



More U 

proved A 



SirThoin/Vi 
Hitiou. 




iB5 



THE PRACTICE 



[Tv^IiAtE- 



A dunce 
Par'iN- 



Tvndnle 
for tlie 

ciUipn. 



of 



M hereunto all the pride, pomp^ Htid vain boiiiit oi the ear- 
ill ual is come, and how God hath resisted htm and our 
prelates iti all their wiles* We, h^iviug uotliiiig to do at aJI^ 
have meddled yet iii all matters, and have ^peiit for oitr 
prelates^ cau&ejs mure tliaii all Christendom^ even unto the 
utter beggaring of ourselves, and have gotten nothing but 
lebuke aud shame and hale among all nations, and a inocki 
and a scorn thereto, of them whom we have most hoi pen. 
For the Frenchmen (as the saving is) uf late da) 3, made 
a play, or a disguising at Paris, in which tlie emperor 
danced with the pope and the French king, aiid wearied 
them, the king uf England sitting on a high bench, and 
looking on. And when it wa^ a^ked, why he danced not, 
it was answered, that he sat there but to pay the minstrek 
iheir wages only. 

A& who should say, we paid for all men's dancing* 
We monied the emperor opetdy, and gave tlie Frenchmen 
double and treble secretly, and to the pope also, Y^ea, 
and though Ferdinand us had money sent him openly to 
blind the world withal, yet the Baying ifl throughout all 
Duchland, that we sent money to the king of Pole, and to 
the Turk also, and that by help of our money Ferdinand us 
was driven out of Hungary. Which thing, though it were 
not true, yet it will breed us a scalj at the last, and get us 
with our meddling more hate than we shall be able to bear, 
if a chance come, unless that we wax wiser betime. 

And 1 beseech hii grace also^ to have mercy of his own 
soul, and not to suffer Christ, aud bis Holy Testament, to 
be peniecuted under his name any longer, that the sword 
of the wrath of God may be put up again, which for tliat 
cause, no doubt is most chiefly drawn. 

And I beseech his grace to have compassion on bis 
poor subjects, which have ever been unto his grace both 
obedient, loving, and kind ; that the realm utterly perish 
not, mih the wicked counsel of our pestilent prelates. 
For, if his grace, which is but a man, should die, the lords 
and commons, not knowing who hath most right to eujo} 



Ttndalb.] 



OF PRELATES. 



487 



die crown, the realm could not but stand in great 
danger. 

And I exhort the lords temporal of the realm, that they 
come and fall before the king's grace, and, humbly desire 
his majesty to suffer it to be tried, who of right ought to 
succeed, and if he or she fail, who next, yea, and who 
third. And let it be proclaimed openly. And let all the 
lords temporal be sworn thereto, and all the knights, and 
squires, and gentlemen, and the commons, above eighteen 
years old, that there be no strife for the succession. 
For if they try it by the sword, I promise them, I see none 
other likelihood, but that as the Cardinal hatli prophesied 
it will cost the realm of England. 

And all that be sworn unto the cardinal, I warn them 
jet once again, to break their oaths, as I did in the Obe- 
dience. And all my lord cardinal's privy secretaries and 
sfHes, by whom he worketh yet, I warn them to beware 
betime. My lord cardinal, diough he have the name of 
allj yet he wrought not all of his own brain : but of all 
wily and exercised in mischief, he called unto him the 
most expert, and of their counsel and practice gathered 
that most seemed to serve his wicked purpose. 

And all that be confederate with the cardinal, and with 
the bishops upon any secret appointment, be they never 
so great, I rede them to break their bonds, and to follow 
right by the plain and open way, and to be content, and 
not too ambitious ; for it is now evil climbing, the boughs 
be brittle. And let them look well on the practice of 
bishops, how they have served all otiier men in times past, 
and into what troubles they have brought them that were 
quiet. Many a man, both great and small, have they 
brought to death in England, even in my days, (beside in 
times past) whose blood God will seek once. Let them 
learn at the last that it is but the cast of the bishops to 
receive the Sacrament with one man secretly upon one 
purpose, and with another man as secretly upon tlie con-* 
trary, to deceive all parties. For of perjury tltey make as 



Tjndale 
prayetli tlic 
iinJer- 
Blanding of 
such as of 
right 

should suc- 
ceed to the 



Tjmdale 
wsrneth 
all the car- 
dinars se- 
cretaries to 
repent, and 
turn to 
God. 



A general 
exhorta- 
tion to all 
kinds of 
people. 



Popish 
bishops 
make no 
account of 
perjury. 



4hH 



'flu? isplftl- 

imlty II ^e 
uifithcf of 

Bide nor of 
the other, 
for ihf^rc ii 

oo tmtb 1Q 
thenif more 
tbnn nhuU 
ierve 
their turEi. 



An ndmo- 

aihori to atl 
itihjec^jti 




THE PRACTICE 



[Tl?flMLIC 



Luke XV, 



much conscience, a* a dog of a bane ; for they have 
power to dispense with all thing, think the v. 

At the beginning of the waj, between the French king 
and the einperor, tlic prognoati cation ssid^ year by year, 
that there shouUl be great labour for peace ; but it nhM 
not come to pai*s, for there is Bicorporeum, or Corpus 
Heutrum, that conieth between and Ictteth il : that h to 
B^yf a body that is nether-nolher^ or holdeth on nether 
part J and that bodjf is the spiritualty, which hold but of 
themselves only. For when any ambassadorft go bet^ieen 
to entreat of peace, the bishops are ever the chief, v^hieh^ 
tliQUgh they make a go dly oration fur the peace only, to 
deceive the laymen, yet, secretly by the bishops of the 
same country ^ they cast a bone in the way, and there can 
be no peace, until the peace be for their pro6t, let it cost 
in the mean season what blood it will. 

And as for them, which for lucre^ as Judas, betray ilie 
truth, and write against their consciences ; and which for 
honour, as Balaam, enforce to curse the people of G'jd ; 

1 would fain (if their hearts were not too hard) that thejf 
did repent. And as fain I would, that our prelates did 
repent » if it were possible for them to prefer Gud^s 
honour before their own* And let them remember what 
wrong they have done to the queen, and what fruit they 
have lost her that never could come unto the right birth, 
for sorrow which she suffered through their false uienns ; 
thau which, what greater treason coidd they work unto the 
realm of England ? 

And unto all subjects I say^ that they i^pen*. For the 
cause of evil rulers is the sin of llie subjects, testifieth the 
Scripture* And the caune of false preachers is, that 
the people have no love unto the trutJi, saith J*aul 

2 Thess* ii* We l>e all sinners an hundred times greater 
than all tliat we suffer. Let us therefore, each forgive 
otlier, reniemljering the greater sinners the more wt Icome, 
if we repent, according to the similitude of the riotous son* 
^Luke mv.) For Christ died for sinners, and is tlieii 



Tvxpalis.] 



OF l^HELATES, 



489 



Saviour^ and his blood their treasure to pny far their sins* 
He is thut fatted calf which ii slain to make iheni good 
cheer withal, if they will repent^ atid come to their father 
again. And his merits ib that goodly raiment^ to cover the 
naked defonnities of our sins* 

These be sufficient st this time» although I could say 
more, and though other have deserved that 1 more said : 
yea, and I could more deeply have entered into the prac- 
tice of our cardinal, but I spare for divers considerations ; 
and namely for his sake, which never spared me, nor any 
faithful fric^nd of his own, nor any that told him truth ; nor 
spare ih to persecute the blood of Christ, in aa clear light 
as ever was, and uuder as subtle colour of hypocrisy as 
ever was any persecution since the creation of the world, 
Neither have I said for hate of any person or persons, 
God I take to record ; but of their wickedness only, and 
to call them to repentance, know lodging that 1 am a 
sinner also, and that a grievous. How be it, it is a devilish 
tlxing^ and a merciless, to defend wickedness against the 
open truth, and not to have power to repent. And 
therefore, 1 doubt not, if men will not be warned hereby, 
but that God will utter more practice by whom he will, 
and not cease until he have broken the bond of wily hy- 
pocrites which persecute so subtilly. 

And, finally, if the persecution of the king's grace, and 
of oilier temporal persons conspiring with the spiritualty, 
be of ignorance, I doubt not, but that their eyes shall 
be opened shortly, and they shall see, and repent, and 
God shall shew them mercy. But, and if it be of a set 
malice against the truth, and of a grounded hate against 
the law of God by the reason of a full consent they have 
to sin, and to walk in their old ways of ignorance, where- 
unto (being now past all repentance) they have utterly 
yielded themselves, to follow m ith full lust, without bridle 
or snafRe, which is the sin against the Holy Ghost ; then 
ye shall see even shortly, that God shall tum the point of 
the sword, wherewith they now shed Christ's blood, home- 



Ilere 

Tyndftk 
Bliewed 
Lluis^lf Co 
be void of 
malice to 
any (trivate 
ptfrsoii. 



God is 
merciful to 
the igtto- 

he pieaaeth 
the rnnil* 
ciou« and 
and wilful 
o (Tender. 



40O THE PRACTICE OF PRELATES. [Tvkdale, 

ward to shed Oieir owti again after all the eiisamplei) of 

the Bible. 

Tbe ofi<:{]i- And let tJiem remember tliat I, well toward three years 

chrbtUtt ^go"©j to prevent all occasions and all carnal bea:*t9 that 

ihao, vHt* seek fleshly liberty, sent forth The true Obedience of a 

yuan be* Christian Man, which yet they coiidemned, but after they 

fort iJiisi 1 13 (J condemned the New Testament, as risht was, whence 
book. ^ . . 

the Obedience hath liLs authority. Now then, if when the 

light h come abroad, in which thetr wickedness cannot be 

lud, they tind no such obedience in the people unto tlieir 

old tyranny f whose fault is it 7 This is a sure couclusiou : 

none obedience tliat is not of love cannot long eudure ; 

and in your deeds can no man see any cause of love : and 

the knowledge of Christ; for whose sake only a man 

would love you, though ye were never so evil, ye persecute. 

Now thenp if any disobedience rise, are ye not the cause 

of it youiselves ? 

Say not but that we be warned ! 



NOTES. 



NOTES. 



P. 1. 1. 20, 21. / wot not how many thousand heresies,'] Bishop 
Tonstal, in a sermon, openly protested that he had found in 
Tyndale's Translation of the New Testament no less than two 
thousand corruptions.-— O. Martin's discovery of the manifold 
corruptions of the holy Scriptures, by the heritics of our dales, 
specially the English sectaries, and of their foule dealing herein, 
by partial and false translations to the advantage of their he- 
risies, in their English Bibles used and authorised since the 
time of schisme. Pref. 25th sect. 8vo. Rhemes, 1582. — See 
Fulke's Defence of the English Translations of the S. S. London, 
1583, p. 5. 

" Athaliah (2 Kings xi. 14.) did craftily to cry out first Treason, 
treason, — when she was the greatest traitor herself; and this 
Martin, concious of the many and foul corruptions in his own 
Rhemish translation, politickly complained of the faults in our 
English Bible." Gregory Martin was born at Maefield, in Sus- 
sex. He died Oct. 28. 1582, and lyeth buried in the Parish 
Church of St. Stephens, in Rhemes, — Fuller's Worthies. Sussex. 
p. 3. 

Dr. Robert Ridley in a Letter to Maister Gold respecting 
Tyndale*s Translation writes : *' Shew ye to the people that if 
any be of so prowde and stuburne stomac that he will beleve 
ther is no fawt ne errours except it be declared to hym that he 
may se it, latt him cum hither to my lord (bishop Tonstal) 
which hath profowndly examined al, and he shal heir and see 
errours except that he be blynde and have no eyes." He had pre- 
viously observed that, ** he is not Jilius Ecclesia Christi that wold 



4H4 



NOTES. 



receave a godspel of auch damned and precised heretikes thewh 
it wer trew/' — See Memorials of William Tyndale, and some of 
bis Contemporaries. 



P. 2. 1. 8. Dum or iueh Uke depilish doctrine,'] John Duns 
Scotua^ denominated the ** most subtle doetor/' born (it i^ 
said in Rees's Cycl. " probably at Dunstance, near Alnwick^ 
in Northumberland ;" but more probably) at Duns, in the 
county of Berwick* Some^ however, will have him bom at 
Down, in Ireland j and that Duna vtm only a contraction of Du- 
nensis* Archbiihop Spots wood proves him a Scotchman from 
the inscription on hiB tomb : Scotia me genuit^ JngUa sittc^ii, 
Oallia fdocmt, Germaniu tmet. Hid education was commenced 
at an institution belonging- to the Franciscan Friars at New- 
castle, and completed at Merton College, Oxford ^ where he 
became a fellow^ and distinguished himself by his proficiency 
in scholastic theology, civil and canon law, logic, metaphysics, 
mathematics^ and astronomy. He went from Oxford to Paris i 
where he attained the most distinguished honours, and was ap- 
pointed professor and regent in the theological school- He was 
at tirst a follower of Thomas Aquinas, but differing from *' the 
angelical doctor'' on the efficacy of divine grace, founded a new 
sectj and hence originated the denominations ThomuU^nd Scotkts. 
Duns was a zealous advocate for the immaculate conception of the 
Virgin Marj. He died 1 308, at Cologne. A complete collection of 
his works waspublL^hed by Lucas Waddinggus, at Lyons, in 1639, 
in H vols, folio. His editor styles him ** Theologonim omnium 
princeps.*' See Rees'j CycL Dung, Mosh. EccL Hist. sec. \4, 
Brucker's Hist. Phil. Enfield, vol* ii. p. 37^* Turner's Hiat, of 
Eng, during the middle ages, vol. iv, p. h\% Tanner, Bik 939. 
Colliers EccL Hist. voL i, 506, Spotswood's Ch. Hist, of 
Scotland. Pits de lUust, Angl, Script 

The justice of Tyndale*s censure of the writings of the 
Schoolmen, and the perfect agreement which, in this respect, ex- 
isted among all the reformers of the English Churchy will be seen 
in the progress of the present work. The enlightened and ever 



NOTES. 495 

memorable Colet^ and his bosom-friend Erasmus^ commenced this 
attack ; and they were followed by Stafford, Latimer, Cranmer, 
and their contemporaries, until the study of the Scriptures and 
the classics was substituted for the " tryfljmge workes of the 
sophisters, sentencyoners, schole doctours, canonysts, and sum- 
mystes. As are Dons, Dorbell, and Durande, Thomas of 
Aquine, Geralde and Gyles of Rome, Bonaventure, Baconthorpe 
and Guido, Caldrinus, Bobius and Baldus, Parormius, Rosellus 
and Roxius, wyth an infynyte rable of suche dyrtye dottages and 
fylthy dregges/' Bale's Image of both Churches : Paraph, on 
Rev. cb. vi. sign. m. IL b. See Knight's Life of Colet, and 
Jortin's Life of Erasmus, passim. 

Perhaps I shall be excused for yet farther extending this note, 
with an extract from a letter of Richard Layton to lord 
Cromwell on his visitation of the University of Oxford, A. D. 
1536. '* We have sett Dunce in Bocardo, and have utterly 
banisshede hym Oxforde for ever, with all his blind glosses, 
and is nowe made a comon servant to evere man, faste nailede 
up upon postes in all common howses of easement. Id, quod 
ocuU$ nuk vidL And the seconde tyme we came to New Colege, 
affter we had declarede your Injunctions, we fownde^all the 
gret quadrant Court full of the leiffs of Dunce, the wynde 
blowying them into evere corner ; and ther we fownde one Mr. 
Grenefelde, a gentilman of Bukynghamshire, getheryng up 
part of the said bowke leiffs (as he saide) there to make him 
sewells or blawnsherrs to kepe the dere within the woode, 
thereby to have the better cry with the howndes.** — M. S. 
Cotton. Faustina. C. vii. fol. 905. Ellis's Orig. Lett, second 
series, vol. ii. p. 61. 



P. 9. 1. 92. lever"} rather ) the comparative degree of lefe, lief, 
leef or leve. 

** Now, wif, qaod be, here n'is but tbou, and I, 
Thou art tbe creature tbat I best love : 
For by that Lord that sit in heven above, 
I had lever dien on a knif. 
Than thee offenden, dere trewe wif." 

Chaucer's Cant. Tales. V. 10034-8. Edit. 1822. 



"" 490 NOTBS. 

<^ Die had die lever irith endinlen knife, 
ThMi to be falae in lofe." 

Speoeery F. Q. L IV. 6. 

"I had ieoef my commiBsioii were openly knowyn Uietito be 
kept cecret.'*~Letter of Sir John WaUop to Henry VUI. 
ILS. 15S7. 



P. 3, 1. 2L Than theif read in their Port€$se9, — See p. «63, 1, 
16] The Portesae waa the Breviary which contained not only 
the ofiBce of the mass^ but all the services except the form of 
marriage, — Ellis's Grig* Lett. vol. up. 10, 

Poriuasses are mentioned among other prohibited hooks m 
the Stat. 3 and 4. E. VI. c. 10. Atid in the FarliaiTient Roll of 
T E, IV. n. 40. there is a Petition, that the robbing of Porteam 
Gray ell, Mannell, &c- should be made felon ie witlioiit clergy j to 
which the Kmg answered^ Le Boy gavitera^ — Tyr whit's Notes 
upon the Canterbury Tales* vol, iv, p. ^80* 

" Also we thonke your noblesse and good ffaderhod of our 
grene gownes no we late send untons to our grete comfort ; 
beseeching your good lordeschip lo remember our Porteux, and 
that we myght have sum me fyne bone Its, send unto us by the 
next secure messig, for necessite so requireth.'* — ^Letter of 
Edward the Fourth when Earl of Marche. M. S. Cotton Vesp. 
F. fol. 9. 

" Por on my Porto* here I make an otb, 
That never in my lif, for lefe ne loth, 
Ne shal I of no conseil yon bewray. 

The same agen to you, qaod she, I say. 
By God and by this Portos I you swere. 
Though men me wolden all in peces tere, 
Ne shal I never, for to gon to^ belle, 
Bewrey o word of thing that ye me tell." 

Chauc. C. T. V. 13061—8. 

** Among theyr vnknowen L#atin houres, theyr masses, and 
theyr diriges, lyeth theyr plentuouse patrimonye in theyr Por- 




I 



NcrrEs. 



40r 



F 



t asses and masse books,*' — Balers Image of both CHiirches, se- 
cond part J ^igLi- t^* ^* b> 

"But herein your nature (^laister Cope) doth right well ap* 
peare. First in the aayd bookeof Actes and Mnmimentes; where 
many otlier good thinges be conteyned, not vnfrutefull nor vn- 
profitjible peraduenture for the instruction of your eonscieueef 
and wherein my labours perhaps might haue deseruad your 
ihankesj all that you dissemble and passe over, onely excerpting 
thoee matters which make for cau illation. Thus the black e 
spider out of pleasauut or fruiteful flowres sucketh hts poyson. 
And what book is so pleas aunt or fruitefulU though it were 
the pope's own Pofivous, \_PoTiuts ^ ^iWi. 164 L] yea his own 
Decretals, yea his own very masse booke, to the reading wherof 
if I brought the like mynde so disposed to cauilU as you bryng 
to the reading of my historie^ but I could finde out twise as 
many mendncm^ macuiaiif impttdentias, dotosj malosJabulaSf fucoi^ 
as you have done in these Actes and Monuments* And yet you 
have done pretely well/' — ^Acfs and Mon. Edit 3. 1576. vol, 
i. p, 559* 

'■Briefly, except it be the bookes onely of the NewTestamentj 
and of theOlde, what is almost in the pope's Churchy but either 
it is mingled or depraued, or altered or corrupted, either by 
aome additions interlased, or by some diminution mangled and 
gelded, or by some glose adulterate, or with manifest lies con- 
tamrnate. So that in theyr doctrine standeth little truth, iu 
theyr Legend es, Portues, anil Masse Bookes lesse trueth, in theyr 
Miracles and Reliques least truth of alk Neyther yet doe theyr 
Sacramentes remayne eleare and voyd of manifest lyes and cor- 
rnpiion* And specially here commeth in the mayster bee, 
which bringeth in much sweet bony into popes* hiues, the 
maister lye, 1 mean of all lyes^ where the pope leauing not one 
cromme of bread nor drop of wine in the reucrent communion, 
vn truly and idotatrously takeih away all substaunce of bread from 
it, turning the whole substaunce of bread into the substaunce of 
Christ's own body : which substaunce of bread, if the pope take 
from the Sacrament, then must he also take the breaking- from it j 
for breaking, and the body of Christ can in nowise stand litteralLy 
together by the Scripture. Thus then as this is proued by the 

VOL. Ik 2 K 



« 




496 NOTES. 

word of Go*l to be a mrttiifest lye ; so thinke not much (good 
reader) he real, aa though I jiaased the bo tides of modestie In 
callisg it the archtye or a master lie of all lies. Because vp|iaii 1^ 
Uiifl ocie^ an infinite nuiaiber of other lyes and erroures in Ihe 
pope's churcbe, us handmaydesj doe wayte wid depend/' — Acts 
and Mod. Ed» 4. L583. vol. L p. 584* . ' ff ^^ 

For the derivation of the word, and otber exafflples ot the 
different ways in which it is spelt, see Du Cange, Todd's John- 
son's Diet* Nare*8 Glossary, and ^Vord worth's EccL hiog* ?oL 

ii. p. ssr* V 



\j- 



i. 



p. 3. L 55. Linwf>d9,a hook of CQmtltutmm.l Lindwood'i 
name is variously spelts as in the text, and Llnwod^ Linwood^ 
Lynwood, Lindwood, Lyndewode, Linnehod, Lynnehode, &c. 
** At this tiine H^iUiam Linwood linlshed his in dust nous and 
useful work of his ComfitationM, lie was bred in Cambridge, 
first icholar of Gon^itte, then Felhw of Pembroke HalL His 
yoiinger years he spent m the study of the Laws, whereby he 
gained much wealthy ond more reputation. Afterwords (quit- 
ting this practice) he betook himself to the tourt and became 
keeper of the Privy Seal unto king Henry the Fifth, who em- 
ployed hi in on a long and important embassy into Spain and 
Portugal. 

" Linwood being no less skilful in Gvt/than Canon Lctw, per- 
formed the place with such exemplary industry and judgement, 
that had not the king's sudden death prevented it> he had been 
highly advanced in the commonwealth. Afterwards he rc- 
assmned his officials place at Canterbury, and then at spare hours 
collected and digested the constitutions of the fourteen latter 
Archbishops of Canterbury, from Stephen Langton to Henry 
Chichely, unto whom he dedicated the work, submitting the 
censure thereof to the Church. A worthy work, highly esteemed 
by foreign lawyers : not so particularly provvmal for England, 
but that they are useful for other countries, his comment 
thereon being a Magazine of the Canon Law, It was printed at 
Paris, 1505, (but at the cost and charges of WilUam Breiton, an 



I 



NOTES. 499 

honest merchant of London) revised by the care of fVolfgartgus 
HippoUus, and prefaced unto by Jodocus Badius, This Linwood 
was afterward made bishop of Saint David's, whose works 
(though now beheld by some as an Almanack out of date) will be 
valued by the judicious whilst learning and civility have a 
bemg/'— Fuller's Church Hist. b. iv. pp. 175, 176. 

I cannot dismiss this Note without introducing the name of 
Christopher Endhowrn, who printed a beautiful editon of this 
work at Antwerp, in the same year, (1596) in which HE printed 
the fint edition of Xyndales Testament, — See Mem. of Tyndale, 
&c. The best edition, however, of Lind wood's Constitutions, 
is that printed at Oxford, 1679. 



P. 4. 1. 8. Erasmus whose tongue, ^c] Perhaps Tyndale 
might have spared this rebuke of Erasmus, as the praise 
he rendered to Tonstal was no more than a natural expression of 
gratitude and friendship; but it seems that his commen- 
dation had excited expectations in Tyndale which had 
been disappointed. The impartial Jortin admits the truth 
of the reflection, in its general application to this great man. 
" He had '* says he (and this it is to be remembered was as early as 
1584) " for some time seemed to take delight in speaking against 
the Reformers to the Roman party, that he might preserve 
their favour, and perhaps (though himself might hardly be sen- 
sible of it) with some view to secure his own revenues. If he 
had had no dependance upon that party, which in his letter toMe- 
kmchthon he calls the popish sect, and which in his letters to the 
papists he calls the Catholic Church, and nothing to hope or to 
fear from that quarter, he would probably have been less upon 
the reserve.'* Jortin's Eras. vol. i. pp. 344, 5. Edit. 1758. 

'' I cannot believe that the fear of losing his pensions, and of 
coming to want, made him say and do things which he thought 
to be unlawful ; but it may be fairly supposed, that he was 
afiraid of disobliging several of his oldest and best friends, who 
were against the Lutheran Reformation ; of offending not only 
Henry VHI. and Charles V. and the Popes, and George of 

2 k2 




fOTES* 



Saxony, and Wolsey, &c. but his palron Warlmm, IVfontjoy, 
More, I'onstalj Fisber, Campegiua, Bembus^ Sadokt. and inan)f 
olbers whom be loved entirely^ atid to some of wbdin be 
was much oblig^cd* Tbeae things might iuSuence his* 
judgment f though he bims^If v^as not &i all aware af it-* 
Jortins Ern&voL i. p. ^75* 



r 



F* 4. 1, 1 L Erasmu/s Annotttiions,} There were five editions of 
the Annotations, printed in the years 1516, 1519> 1522, 152T, 
and 1535. Tyndale used the fourth editiun, in which the name 
of Tonstal is first introduced. The third edition mentions only 
Montjoy, Warbam, and Wolsey. lu the fourth and fifth editiouSi 
and in Le Clerc's edition of his works, the passage, to which 
Tyndalc refers, read a thus : 

" Quid enim dicam de Britannia, ubl tot mihi sunt Moecenates, 
inter quos primus clarissinms Baro GnltelmusMontjoiuSy pro£- 
imus Guliehnuji, Archiepiscopus Cantuuriensis et totius Aiiglis 
PrimaSj tertius Thomas CardJnalis Eboracensis, vir acerrimi 
judicii : summus Rex ipse, nan minus animi tjuam fortune bo- 
nis florentissimos, quorum uterque et benlgniUite sua ultro fovet 
olium nostrum^ et, si Ubeat^ invitat ad ampUora* Joanncm 
Fisoerum Episcopum liofTensem in hoc catalogo, in quo magiA 
eitpenduntur sufi^ragia quam numerantun unum pro multis ua^ 
merare poteram, Deinde Cntbertum Tunstallum, Epiacopum 
quondam Londoniensem, nunu Dun el mensem. In Gulielnii 
Warami muuus s uccessit Thomas Cronroerus, vir no n profession e 
tantum Thcologus, sed et animo moribusque vere theologicis, 
qui in favore erga me nequaquani cedit ei, cui succedtt* 
Adde his Joannem Longloldom, Episcopum Ltncolniensem, 
libris etiam editis clarum/' — Eras. Oper. tom, vi. 

One instance of Tonstars kindness lo Erasmus, and bis DOtice 
of it, may he selected from bis Letters. " Cum apud me sob- 
oitus essem, quibus verbis illi gralias agerem, iUe ultro quin* 



In 



like Ibis, 




NOTES. 501 

quaginta scutatos Gallicos addidit, nee alia ratione llcuit ex- 
cusare. Dispeream, si quid habet haec setas eum eo viro eon- 
ferendum/* — ^Ep. 241. c. 1658, as eited by Jortin, vol. i. p. 111. 



P. 4. 1. 15. Sir Harry Gilford] Spelt also Guldeford, Guilford, 
and Guildford. • " Henry Guldeforde, or Guilford, was one 
of the greatest ornaments of the court of Henry VIII. In the 
early part of his life, he served with reputation in the wars with 
the Moors in Spain, under Ferdinand and Isabella. His 
learning and personal qualities recommended him to the 
esteem of the great Erasmus, with whom he held a corres- 
pondence. In the seventh year of Henry VIII. he was con- 
stituted master of the horse for life.'* — Ob. cir. M, 40. Granger*a 
Biog. Hist, of Eng. vol. i. p. 64. Edit. 1769. 



P. 4. 1. 27. wc/Z^nd]— conveniently provide for ijlnd, to supply 
with money and necessaries. See p. 417- to find poor people 
withal ; and p. 423. the finding of all the poor; the finding of 
scholars, 8fC, 

" Poure puple bed reden, and persooes in stocks 
Find bem for Godes love." 

Parapkrtue, — Feed poor bed-ridden people and prisoners for the love oC 
Ck)d.^P. Flouh. p. 148. Dr. Whitaker*s Edit. 1813. 



P. 6. 1. 16. lewd] ignorant ; unlearned. 

^ For tewed peple loven tales olde ; 
Swhiche thinges can tbey wel report and holde.^ 
Cbauc. C.T.v. 12371. 

' Lewede men Ijrved hym wel." 

P. Plonh. p. 4. 




SOS NOTES. 

" Tliyf it by loDfit^tlj for lorde, forlered and iette^e 

Eriie halydiy to buy re hoUytlic thcMrTke/'^P. Plouli p. 159. 1*6,7. 

^* AgAinst the wltti« gifte of idootiDge in » bo we 

Fonde And itade wordes ihotx i€Utftie duest oot thn>we| 
Wbicb, if thou wilt« httte of roe a worde or twayne 
QukkJie tlioa mjiyit learne liow foodlie thou doest btmmt/* 

Aicbacu's ToiopMlus. Edit. t&7K fol 20, 

'< Cannot be quid ai^arce a brvelhiDg-irbile 
But yon mu^t troubk- bini with i^^d compUmta." 

Shakeft. Rich. Iff. AeL K Se. S. 

*' Hereby b plainly seen, how learning is robbed of the best 
wjts ; first, by the great beating, and after, the ill chofjsin^ of 
scholars to go to the iiniversities ; whereof cometh partly ihat 
iewd and spiteful proverb, sounding to the just hurt of learning, 
and shame of learned men^ that the greatest clerks be not the 
wisest men/'- — Ascbam's WorkfJ, p. 106. Edit. 1815. 

'* This false persuasion of lerning, wherewith the deuyle io- 
ueigleth the aimple and Ingendreth in them a pride of conning 
and vnderstanding, which they haue not» is the foundacion and 
roote, wherupon is buylded and groweth false doctrine, in the 
high misteryes of our religion j and gpecyally rn the moost bleiised 
Sacrament of thauUer, wherin diverse have of late peruer&ely 
reasoned^ and vn learnedly rpolLen with such presumptuQu^e 
pryde, and intoUerable arrogancye, as declare plainly the same 
to procede of the s pi rite of the deuyle fiiU of errours, and lyes, 
biyndenes, and ignorance ; by reason wherof, they stumble in 
the playne waye, and can not see in the mydde daye. For what 
can be more euydeni ly spoken of the presence of Ch riste's naltirall 
bodye and bloud, in the moost blessed Sacrament of theauher, 
then is in those wo r ties of Scripture whiche our Savioure Christ 
ones said, and be iiifullible lruth,and stylsailh, in consecration 
of this most holy Sacrament by the common minlstre of the 
Cburche ; " This Is my body/* Hut against this tmthe, the 
deuyle striueth, and ^ghteth by his ministers, and lemde 
apostles, with sophisticall deuyses, wherewith he troubleth the 
grosse iniaginacions of the symple people/' — Gardner's ]>€tee> 
tion of the Devil's Sophistry, &c, fol. 5. Lond. 1546. 

" Vet to cloke your false spcach with hipotnsie, you saye 



NOTES. 503 

properly, that Christ consecrateth himselfe in those formes of 
bread and wine, with which worde consecrate, you iugle by 
your divilish sophistirie. For if ye meane, he heloweth him- 
selfe with bread and wine (which your word consecrate doeth 
signifie) as lewde as you take vs, we would laught at yotir folie. 
If you woulde saye by that worde, he tourneth himselfe into 
the fourme of breade and wyne : so then your doctrine is that 
Christe cometh vnto vs in breade and wine. And we saye that 
he is comen all redie, and in the Aeshe, and in the same fleshe 
is gone vp to heauen, and from thense shall come to iudge 
all fleshe."— A. Gilby's Ans. to Devil. Detect, fol. 14. 

'' It is ouermuche shame to vse Christes worde as our en- 
cbauntment ouer deade creaturs to chaung them (no mft can 
tell howe) to call downe Christe into breade, to bringe hym 
into the chalice : where he, beinge a whyle blessed and blowene 
wyth your stinkeinge breathes shall tarie so longe a God, as it 
shall please man, yea and that scant an honest man sometimes. 
Surely, it maketh us leude people, to think that you do not take 
bim as a God when we see you so vnreuerently, breathe on him, 
make him leape about the chalice, break hym, and that nothinge 
after the institucion wherin we shoulde all together be parte** 
takers of the breade and cup of Christe for the foode of oure 
soules.'* — Gilby, fol. 37. 

For the gradual changes in the meaning, and the various ap** 
plications of the words lewd, lewdness, &c. see Mr. Todd's 
Johnson's Diet, tmd Dr. Jamieson*s Diet. 



P. 6. 1.21 and 25. to improve] to reprove ; to rebuke ; to refute. 
**All Scripture geven by inspiracion of God, is proffitable to teach, 
to improve, to amende and to instruct in rightewesnes." (9 Tim. 
iii.) — ^Tyndale*s Testament, Second Edit. 1534. 

*' And yet the booke of Common Prayer neyther useth any 
suche speach nor giveth any suche doctrine, nor I in no pointe 
improve that godly booke, nor varye from it. But yet glad I 
am to heare that the sayd book lyketh you so well, as no man 
can mislyke it, that hath anye godlynes in hym ioyned with 



504 




NOTES 




knoweledgc/ — Cranmer's Answer to Gardner, p. 60. Ed, 
1551, 

*' When he (Paul) coma tied with Peter aad the hie aposllea* 
of his gospel and preaching thel could e improve nothingj nether 
teach him ani thing/'— O bed, of a Christ. Man, Edit. 1561, 
foK 66. 

" Theyr raylinge vppon the open and manifest truth which they 
f»}ude not unpro^, and resifi tinge tire hoi ye goat, and sleynge 
of the preachers of right uousnea, brought the wrath of God 
vppon them and wns cause of their vtter destruccyon/' — Practice 
of Prelates. Edit, 1530. aig. a. 9, 

"Though the prophet Jeremy was uu justly accused^ yet doth 
not that improve any thing that 1 have said/' — Whitgift, cited 
by Nares* 



P. 7. L 8. 14, 23. iofemr m ^ feartih iis; tofeaT the Jeth.^ To 
fear, in old writers^ frequently raeans to terrify j but f^r 
amounting to terror seems scarcely appliciible to these, and 
many other, places where the expressiau occurs. I quote a pa- 
ragraph for an example, ^'hich presents a striking contrast of 
the past, with the present, state of public opinion and feeling 
in reference to the dignity and importance of the clerical 
office. " Thys peruerse judgement of men hindreth nothynge 
so much as learnynge, bycause commonlye those whych 
be un fittest for learnyng, be cheyfly set to learnynge. As 
yf a man nowe a dayes haue two sones, the one impotent, 
weke, sickly, lispynge, stuttynge, and stamerynge, or hauinge 
any mis-shape in his bodye ; what doth the father of suche one 
commonlye saye ? This boye is fit for nothynge els, but to set to 
lernyng and make a prest of. As who would say. The outcastes 
of the worlde, hauynge neytbercountenaunce, tounge, nor wit, 
(for of a peruerse bodye cumeth commonly a peruerse mynde,) 
be good ynough to make those men of, whiche shall be appointed 
to preache Goddes holye woorde, and minister hys blessed sacra- 
mentes j besydes other moost weyghtye matters in the common- 
welthe, put ofte tymes, and worthelye, to learned mennes dia- 



NOTES. 505 

cretion and charge ; whan rather suche an offyce, so hygh in 
dig^nitie^ so godlye in administration, shulde be committed to no 
man, whiche shulde not haue a countenaunce fullof cumiyncsse 
to allure good menne, a bod ye fill of manlye authoritie to fear 
ill men, a witte apte for al learnynge, with tongue and voyce 
able to perswade all men/' — Ascham's Toxophilus, B. fol. 35. 
Edit. 1545. 



P. 8. 1. 1. many gests of the Scripture.'] "As thou seest in 
all the stories of the Bible.*'— p. 165. " Who did all those 
wonderful deeds which thou readest in the Bible/' — p. 169. 
" As the histories of the Bible make mention.'* — p. 231. " Some 
gest that a man telle th me was done at Rome.** — p. 1 16. He 
here evidently alludes to the collection of stories called Gesta 
Romanorum. — (See pp. 347, 362.) For an account of this work, 
the reader is referred to Mr. Douce*s interesting Dissertation in 
the second vol. of his Illustrations of Shakespeare^ and of 
Ancient Manners. Lond. 1807. 

" Job the gen til and wys, in bus gettet wytnesseth 
What shal worthe of suche, wenne tbei lyf leten." 

Par. — Of sache Job, the patient and the wise, beareth witness, in the book 
of his acU, what shall become of them when they quit this life." — P. 
Plooh. p. 184. 



P. 9. 1. 26. they ear,'] — To ear is to plough. 

•* I have, God wot, a large feld to ere; 
And weke ben the oxen in my plow.'* 
Chauc. C T. V. 888. 
** Tho sayd Perkin Plouhman by Seynt Peter of Rome 
Ich have an half acre to eren by the heye weye ; 
Hadde ich ered that half acre, and sowed it hit after^ 
Ich wolde wend with ghow, and the weye teche.'* 

Pftr.^Then said Perkin Plouhman, by St. Peter, I have half an acre to 
plough by the highway side. Had I ploughed and sowed that half acre, I 
would go with you and teach you the way. — P. Plouh. p. 128. 



^ 



NOTES, 



'^ He tbjit tw^4 mj Und^ ^ites m^rteam^ «T)<1 onvL-a mc le&ve t«> ina tlie crop.** 
Airs Well that Euds WelL Act I. Sc. 3. 
" Mftke the seft Kerre them, wlUch they ^r And wound 
Witb kwb of every kind." 

Ant. BnA Ct«^p- Aet L Se. 4. 

Sec 1 Smm.viii. 12. — Isa. xxx. 24, — ^J>eut. xxi, 4, — Gea, xlv. 6. 
— Exod. xxiv, 2 1 . for tbe use of this verb. 
MilIqiic's Shakes. voL 10. p. 338, Edit. IS^l. 



P. 90, L 5» flf rfte feoji a?a^.] At least. See pp.50, 300, S07,«tc- 



P. S3. L 34. B«gj.] Objects of terror, 

" Thou shalt not ncde to be afrayed for any huggen bj night, 
uof for the arrowe that flyeth by daye,'' (Psalm xcu 5.)— Mat- 
thew's Bible, Edit. 1549. 

" They concluded with one assent by the auctotyte of the 
scripture utid of the holy gost, that the hethen shuld not be 
circumcyaed ; and not by the com uiandiiient of Peter vnderthe 
payneof cursynge, excommunication, and interdiiynge, and like 
bogges to make foles and children afrayde with all."^ — Practice of 
Prelates, Edit. 1530. sign. B. 2. 

" The masse beyng ended, the archbishop [Becket] (putty ng 
of hys pall^ hys miter and other robes) procedeth to the king's 
court : but yet not trusting peraduenture so greatly to the 
the strength of hys masse (to make the matter more sure) 
he taketh also the sacrament priuily about hym, thinkyng 
therby himselfe sufficiently defenced against all fetig^*/'— Foxe's 
Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 213. 3d. Edit. 1576. 

" Warwick waa a bugr that feared us all." — Henry VI. Act r. Sc. 2. 

** Bug is a bugbear, a terrifie being.*' — Johnson. 

So in Cymbaline : 

" are become 

The mortal hugs of the field." 



NOTES, 507 

Again^ in Stephen Gossin's Schoole of Abuse, 1579 : 
** These lmg» arc fitten to fear babes than to more men/' — Stevens. 

Malone's Shakespeare, vol. xriii. pp. 519, 20. Ed. 1821. 

See also Winter's Tale, Act 3. So. 2. 

" Sir, spare your threats 
The buff which you would fright me with, I seek. 
To me can life be no commodity. " 

There is a curious chapter in Reginald Scot's Discovery of 
Witchcraft " Of Vain Apparitions : how people have been 
brought to feare Bugs; which is partly reformed by the 
preaching of the Gospel." p. 85. Edit. 1665. Of the grand 
bug, or *' terror by night,*' (Psalm xci. 5.) the Incubus, for- 
merly supposed to be an evil spirit, he gives a long account, 
with remedies for the cure of this disease, p. 48. 

See Douce*s Illustrations of Shakespeare, vol i. p. 328. 



P. 26. I. 28. not dumb as the signs of our dumb God the pope. 
P. 30. 1. 30. The Holy Ghost is no dumb God, nor wo God that 
goeth a mumming.'] That is, the popish ceremonies, and the apish 
gesticulations of the priests in the service of the mass, are un- 
meaning, useless, and ridiculous : or, as he says,,p. 317/' Christ's 
signs speak, and antichrist's be dumb.** 

A Mummer is a masker -, one who performs frolics in a per- 
sonated dress : originally, one . who gesticulated without 
speaking. 



P. 29. 1. 29. It is not believed except he hold up Ids finger 
also!] Are we here to distinguish between holding up the 
filler and the hand 9 The liand was held up in confirmation 
of an oath, was the finger sufficient for an ordinary promise or 
engagement ? 

" 1 make a vow 

Herkeneth, felawes, we three ben alle ones : 
Let eche of us hold up his hond to other. 
And eche of us becomen others brother." 

Chauc. C. T. V. 12629-.^2. 



508 



NOTES, 



Amongst the Jews^ in the adminTstralioii of an oiitb> the juror 
held up hi 9 right hand towards heaven, which explains a passage 
in the cxiivth Psalm, *' whose moulh speaketh vanity, and iheir 
rig hi -hand is a rig hi- hand of falsehood*'' The same form is re- 
tained iu Scotland still. — See Faky^s Mur, Fhtl. vol, i. p* 195* 



R 31- 1< SI. ^ Polar/} so spelt Edit, 1573* pollar. Edit. 
1530. It should have been spelt in the text poller. I have not 
met with the word elsewhere. It is not noticed by Mr Todd, or 
Archdeacon Nares, It is nearly synonymous with plunderer 
or robber j and was practically the same to those who were 
polled and pilled with the sanction, or under the pretence of 
the laws and customs of holy church. The words to poll 
and to pill J with their derivatives, are frequently used about 
this period in reference to the extictions and oppressions of the 
Romiah clergy. One example shall suffice, 

'* It plcaseth God to she we vs ouer muche of your liuinge to 
be blynded any longer with you. We reade in the gospel, that 
God heareth no sinnurs. Howe shamles in al parrishes they 
lyue whyclie are the onely God makers, all the world seth^ and 
crieth out thereupon* Suche whordome hath not ben harde 
of. Suche drunken es hath not bene sene. Al are drowned 
in couetousnes, from the bishope to the parishe pnste. 
And that fele we pore people being polled and pilled bi your 
pristes and proctoures, and haueing nothing of your landes 
for al our awete and labours but a blinde heape of dombe 
ceremonies. God (as al thlnge is possible vnto hym) can make 
you God shepeherdes. But yet I dare not conclude that he hath 
done it. Neithere what he wyll do dare I a0irm, you are so 
linked wyth Antichriste* Whose pride intollerable to boaste 
bymself to have [Kiwre in heauen, in earth, and in the thred place 
(I [know] not where) 1 nede not confute. This holye mother 
church is ashamed of hir children and brainsicke inuentions, 
thoughe she durst neuer in alt hir pride, make any mo articles of 
the faith then xjj,all grounded upon scriptures. But nowe your 
litle bishop church, or rather conventikle of xij. urxiiij, bishops, 



NOTES. 



50i 



nauat b€ so bighly enhaunced, that it may eucrease other vi. or 
rather mo^ which we dayly loke for, in prejudice to other con- 
tne«, whyche shal be more sErongely established wyth the 
ewerdej and more sore puniahed by fire (if they be violated) than 
any of the com mciun dements of God : vneinge such proude 
brag^ges, racking and burninge, that no man dare saye but it 
i s trwe, ho we so euer it please you hishopes to glose the sen pturea, 
and make nc we article^} atid new faieth^ anewe for to be beleued 
in paine of death and burninge. Such authoritie vse you ouer 
the scripture as your father did before youe, whoe dyd firste 
deiiise tbys your divellishe lawe, that no man shoulde be so 
bohte to interpretate the SLTipture any other wise then he and 
his doc tours had authorised and assigned* Where contrariwise, 
Paule wylleth that in the congregacion or church of Christ, ij. 
or iij. prophets shoulde apeake and the reside w shoulde judg. 
Then if any tbinge were reueiled or disclosHl to him that sitteth, 
the first shoukle holde his peace, that all might prophecie one 
after an other^ that al might learne, that al might take comforte, 
and that the s pi rites of the prophets might be subjecte vnto the 
the prophets. If this mildnesse were amonge vs ; that one of 
us might and woulde beare an other, then shoulde Chrutes doc- 
trine and religion flourishe, whiles we were redie to geve an- 
8 were euerie one of the faieth that we haue conceiuedj ac- 
cordeinge to the commaundment of Peter. Where no we there 
U nothing but, These heretickes are proude and arrogant, they 
haue no krninge, they haue not studied for knowledge. And 
we do an s were again (as w^e may iuatly) that we havelabowred 
for knowledge^ as ditigentlie and with as humble hertes as you 
haue done, God hath indued vs wyth the k no we I edge of the 
latine^ greke, and hebrue, and al other sciences, far aboue that 
you had when you were in the scholes,"' — Gilby*s Answer to 
Gardner. foLSl, 2S» 



P,35, h %t , carrim-kiin] Applied properly to beasts ; to jades 
that be more c^rrriott -like, or more lean. — Huloet. cited by 
Mr. Todd. 



n 





510 



NcrrEs. 



P, 42. L 7- goest'wooiward ; p. 67- u^o^?a?afd-^Oing',] Gomg'- 
woolwartl was wearing a coarse woollen garment neKt the skin, 
anci pracibed by the religious orders as a meritorioiis deed ^ 
(see pp 260*) it was sometimes enjoined as a penance, and oc* 
caaionally adopted simply as a means of mortificationj or, as 
our author would say, '' taming' of the flesh.*' Humphry Hon- 
mouthy Tyndale's patrou, says of him, " I never sawe 
him were lynen about him in tht; space he was with me/* 
Ilarleian M©S. N. 4^5. fol, 10. Among the instructions fi»r the 
general visitation of monusteries An. 15^5, one Item of en- 
qniry was, '' Whether ye wear shirts or sheets of woollenp or 
that ye have any constitution, ordinance, or dispensation, 
granted or made to the contrary, by sufiieient and law fid au- 
thority,"— Burnet, VoL I. CoL p, 195. Edit. 1? 15. 



^ 



See the commentators on Shakespeare^ on Armado's confes- 
sion, in Love's Labour Lost. 

" The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt ; 
I ^ woUward for pentiAce, 

fioyet. IVaei jwd it was enjoined him m Rome for want of Unea,** 



Archdeacon Nares has given the substance of their com- 
ments, with additional examples of the use of the word in his 
Glossary. One more exauiple may be taken from Dives and 
Pauper : " The wurshyppe and the prayers and the seruice that 
they shuld do to God, they do it to the fende. And thinges 
that ben ordeyned only for Goddis seruice, they spende it in 
the devylles seruice. And therefore they that vse holy wordes 
of the gospel. Pater Noster, Ave, or Crede, or holy prayers in 
theyr wytchecraftes, for charmes or coniurations, and all they 
that vse holy water of the fonte, holy crisrae, masses syngynge, 
fastinges, contynence, wullen goinge, and suche other in their 
witchecrafte, they make a full hye sacrifice to the fende. It 
hath oft ben knowen, that wytches with sayenge of their Pater 
Noster, and droppynge of the holy candel in a mans steppes 
that they hated, hath done his fete rotten of.'* fol. 53. Edit. 1536. 




NOTES. 511 

P. 45 1. 16. Such riches as are shewed at St. Thomases shrine.'} 
*' Thomas a Becket, commonly called St. Thomas of Canterbury, 
was murdered in the year 1170. His body was buried first in 
the undercroft of Canterbury cathedral^ but shortly after 
was taken up, and laid in a most sumptuous shrine in 
the East End by archbishop Langton, Becket being cano- 
nized by the pope, a saint and martyr. To this shrine people 
of all degrees and from all parts, flocked in pilgrimage. Once 
in 50 years a jubilee was observed, on account of the transla- 
tion of his bodjr to the shrine. At the fifth celebration of this 
kind, in 1420, the concourse of people is said to have been 
100,000.*' MSS. Eccl. Cantuar. Biblioth. c. xiii. 2. See also Batte- 
ley's Antiq. of Canterbury. " The jubilee lasted fifteen days, ' 
during which the visitors were well entertained. They, in re- 
turn, loaded the martyr's shrine with offerings. A very curious 
account of the costly presents of this description is preserved 
in a manuscript belonging to the cathedral library at Canter- 
bury ; which, among other Inventories, contains Inventorium 
rerum contentarum in officii custodis Martyrii S. Thonue, viz. de 
vestinientis, jueltis, reUquiis, &c. MSS. c. xi. 5." — Todd's Illus- 
trations of the lives of Chaucer and Gower, p. 355. 

Thus, as the historian remarks, *' The devotion towards him 
had quite effaced in that place the adoration of the Deity ; 
nay, even that of the Virgin. At God's altar, for instance, 
there were offered in one year three pounds two shillings 
and sixpence ; at the Virgin's sixty-three pounds, five shil- 
lings, and sixpence ; at St. Thomas's eight hundred and 
thirty-two pounds, twelve shillings, and threepence. But 
next year the disproportion was still greater : There was 
not a penny offered at God's altar} the Virgin's gained 
only four pounds, one shilling, and eight-pence 3 but St. 
Thomas had got for his share, nine hundred and fifty-four 
pounds, ^x shillings, and three-pence. Lewis VII. of France 
had made a pilgrimage to this miraculous tomb, and had 
bestowed on the shrine a jewel esteemed the richest in 
Christendom." — Hume's England, vol. iv. p. 181. Edit. 1796. 
Burnet, vol. i. p. 233. 




SIS NOTES/ 

P, 47, 1, 23. waxen sod] grown or become serious, grove, 

steady. 

'* Tliorgli ih^ feude and oure flesch and tbi» frelc worlde 
Seaegetb ftevene si the tlie »addest mau ou ertke 
And lyf holies^t of Ijf tU^t JjneUi under tbe sotme^*" 

Pur.— Thfougli l!ie temptatioaa of the dc?il, tlietle^b, fttid the friU world, 
the most serious nnin on cnrrh ttinneth sc^-eo limes (daily ); ye a, even Ibe 
holiest lirer tli^t la uader Ue siia.-^P. Plouh. p, 16Bp 



F. 6%. I. 11. a g'ood!} See Shukesp. Two Gent, of Verona, 
Act. iv. Scene 4- 

'* At that time I nmde he « good,** I e, in g^ood earnest. 

Toutdehon, Fr, SoinTui e*s translation of Ovid from 

Ana^ine to Theseus : 

" — — beatings of my breast m-giMMl,** — Scerena. 

So, in Marlowe'3 Jew of Malta, 1G33 : 

" And therewithal! their knees have rankled to, 
That I have laugh'd a-good." 

Again in Turberville's Tragicall Tales, p. 98, 8vo. 1587 : 
'* Whereat she waylde and wept a-good** — Malone. 



P. 65. I. 9. a rove] in succession 5 in a line. 

" Forsothe Ordulf quod the kyng tho 
This same Swevene verylyche met y. 
Thus three nyghtes arowe now last a go 
And suche a fayre lady me thought y aey." 

Legendary Chronicle of Wilton Abbey, MS. Cotton. Faust. B.III.fol. 224. 



NOTES. 513 

P. 65. 1. 17- pillars and poleaxes] a more suitable place will 

occur for a description of these emblems of the pope*s au- 
thority. See pp. 168. 279. M4. 



P. 66, 1. 28. Nineveh — / think it was then the greatest city in 
the warldJ] ** Nineveh was one of the most ancient, the most 
famous, the most potent, and most extensive cities of the 
world. It is very difficult to assign the time of its foundation ; 
but it cannot be long after the building of Babel. It stood on 
the banks of the Tigris -, and in the time of the prophet 
Jonah, who was sent thither under Jeroboam the second king 
of Israel, and, as we judge, under the reign of Pul, father 
of Sardanapalus^ king of Assyria 3 its circuit was three days* 
journey. Diodorus Siculus, lib. ii. says, it was one hundred 
and fifty stadia in length, fourscore and ten stadia in breadth, 
and four hundred and fourscore stadia in circuit ; i. e. about 
seven leagues long, three leagues broad, and eighteen leagues 
round. Its walls were a hundred feet high, and so broad, 
that three chariots could drive abreast upon them. Its towers, 
of which there were fifteen hundred, were each two hundred 
feet high." — Taylor's Calmet's Diet. Edit. 1819. 



P. 68. 1. 82. cautels of the law.^ Cautel, a wile, or sleight, 
or crafty way to deceive -, as defined by Cotgrave, Huloet 
"and Minsheu. '* Saynt Paule saithe, (1 Cor. i.) Where is nowe 
the wyse man that letteth and trusteth so well by his wytte, 
where is now the man of law with all his cautelles, where 
is nowe the seker of nature and of the cours of kyud of this 
worlde } God hath tourned the wysedome of this world into 
foly." — Dives and Pauper, fol. 40. b. 

" But it is a wonderous thyug to see what shiftes and cautels 
the Popysh Antichristes devise, to colour and cloke their 
wicked erroures ! And as a chaine L) so joyned togither, that 
one linke draweth an other after it, so be vices and errours 

VOL. II. 2 L 



514 



NOTES, 



knit togilher, that euery one drawetU hii felowe with hym/' — 
Cmnmer's Answer to Gardner on the Sacrament, p, 450. 
Lood. 1 551. 




P, 72, 1. 15. i»a Gknowen of thy sin^ and confm it, and kuowlalge 
it unto thy Fathej'2 He conscious of tliy sin, &c. '* Aknowe, parL 
PB* Sas. To b€n akuowe. C L. 1199* To confess. / am 
almowe. Bo. IV. pr. 4. I acknowledge/^ — Tyrwhitt's Glos- 
uary to Ch. C* T* 



P. 73* L 21 J 53. panter^ or pantler; the officer in a great 
family who had the care of the hread, or the pantry, which 
place was formerly used solely for keeping the bread. 

*' A gooil sb allow youn^ fellow : be would !mve made a good pittUlrr, be 
waulil h^vt chipped brc&d Tretl/'^Sbftkei. 2 Heary W. Act it, Sc. 3. 

" IVbcTi ray old wife liTec), upon 

Tbia day^ she was both pander ^ bitLler^ cook ; 

Both dome aod Hcrviml : wckomM all \ served all ; 

Would ainj^ her sangTi and dance her tuni t now her*. 

At Tipi>er end o* the table, now, i* the middle ; 

Od his shoulder, and his : her face o'fire 

With labour ; and the thing, she took to quench it, 

She would to each one sip.*'— Wint. Tale Act \y. Sc. 3. 



P. 77. 1. 4. With all that trust tlie will of God] I have here fol- 
lowed the reading of the folio Edit. 1573; but I am now satisfied 
that it should have been, as in the £d. of 1528, with all that 
thirst (thurst) the will of God. See p. 93. Even so is the 
faithful ever athirst, and an hungred after the will of God. 
They thirst and hunger to do God*s will. And p. 129. the 
spirit longeth and thirsteth for strength to do the will of God. 



P. 79. 1. 2. William Roye ; 1. 6. Set him a work to make rhymes.] 
In examining the Registers of the bishops of London, for which 




NOl'ES. 515 

I have been indebted to the kind and liberal permission of the 
present ornament of that see, the worthy successor of a Sher- 
]ock> a Lowth, and a Porteus, I find the names of Tyndale and 
Roye in the closest alliance^ as they were also in the mind and 
vindictive purpose of cardinal Wolsey ; against whom the prose 
of Tyndale and the rhymes of Roye were unceremoniously di- 
rected. — See Mem. of Tyndale &c. 

It is a coincidence worth noticing that Chaucer*s Fersone 
was no friend to '^ rime.** 

** I cannot geste, rom, ram, ruf, by my letter. 
And God wote, rime hold I but Utel better. 
And therfore if yoa list, I wol not gloae, 
I wol you tell a litel tale in prose.** 

Ch. C. T. V. 17354—7. 

There is another curious fact Recorded by Bayle in reference 
to a famous sectarist : " I scarce meet'* says be, '' with any 
author, who does not esteem it a crime in Arius, that he put his 
opinions in verse, to be sung by his disciples.'' 



P. 89. 1. 35. bate'\ Here I find that I have inserted an ex- 
planation of the word in brackets in the text. 

** Shall crer ciWl bate 

Grow and devour our state ? " 
Countess of Pembroke's Antonius. 
*' She set my brother first with me at bate.** 

Mirror for Magis. p. 74. See Nare*8 Glos. 



P. 92. 1. 13. soak'mg disease] or sucking disease ; the original 
spelling is sokynge. To soak and to suck are used synony- 
mously for to drain, to exhaust ; of which see examples in 
Todd's Johns. Diet. That sokynge hiid originally the two dis- 
tinct meanings of these words is evident from the celebrated 
Promptorium Parvulorum, (Harleian M.S. «91.) 



» Sohyngf or long lyyng in lycurc. 
Sokyng of a pappe or tele." 
3l2 



51fi NOTES. 

Sackings should have been adopted in the text, and in p, 3f77^ 
as tb<! more suitable epithet for the wasting* induence of 
disease* 



R 9^. K 15, iUbher$auce arid turat/i] spelt Edit. 153^, s^bbrr$ause 
and shaihe ; Edil» L578 the latter word is corrected swashe. The 
word occurs in a curious poemj written, I think there can be 
little doubt J by Bale, though not noticed among' his worka. 
It is entitled " An answere to a papystycall exhortacyon pre- 
tentlynge to avoyde false doctryne, under that colour to 
niayntcyne the same.'* It ij without prmter*s name, place, or 
dale : but was printed abroad just after the burning of Dr, 
Barnes, in Henry the VITtth's reign. *' The Papyste" in reference 
to this circumsunce says : 

*' But yf the dei^ll ^ere here And brent, 
Some woMe bym pytrouft] j lAnieat, 
Id ther hftrlca tbry be so kynde : 
Hya confewioii abuld he kept «« treunre, 
Add wiib some bclcTed aboFe measure, 
Tkey are now so Wyode/' 

in abuse. Bake, if he was the author^ was quite ii tuaich tor 

his opponent. He begins with a sort of prologue : 

** Ereryc pylde pedlar 
Wyll be a medlar, 
Though ther wytts be drowsye 
And ther lemynge lowsye, 
Ther meters all mangye, 
Rashe, rural), and graiigye, 
Yet will they forward halte, 
As menne mased in malte. 

These vyle cannell rakers 
Are now becumme makers ; 
Ther poems out they dashe 
'With all ther twyber swathe, 
Ther darnell and ther chaffe, 
'fher swylle and swynyshe drafTe ; 
Soche pype, soche melodye, 
Soche bagge, soche beggerye. 



NOTES. 5L7 

Of pylde popyvhe facyoDS 
Tliey strowe exhortacions, 
llie people to infecte 
With the sedes of ther sccte ; 
Prctendynge to dyffyne 
Agaynst the false doctryne. 
But soche dyrtye geare 
Ded menne never heare. 

They teache not in meter 
With Paule, Johan, and Peter, 
The worlde to edyfye 
With Goddes worde christenlyc ; 
But Scripturs they deprave. 
As madde men that do rave, 
They daunce with the devyll 
To magnyfe ther evyll. 

'I1iey drysle forth a dramnie, 
As be that to Christ camine, 
To trap hym in a snare. 
Forsoth it is fonde ware. 
Let Christen men take hede 
Unto ther wycked sedc. 
For they seke for to hlynde 
The syllyc syniple niynde.** 



P. 105« 1. 9. neither skiUeth ii] Neither doth it matter ; or 
make any difference. " Unto our purpose and for the question 
in hand, whether the commandments of God in Scripture be 
general or special it skilleth not.** — Hooker's Eccl. Pol. Vol. I. 
p. 371. Edit. 1793. If Hooker's works were not in every one's 
hands, I should scarcely be able to resist the inclination I feel 
to extract two or three pages from the context of this example, 
where, as a perfect master of his argument, he disposes of 
" the question in hand ;'' i. e. whether any thing may be estab- 
lished in the church which is not commanded by the word of God. 
Let every theological student seek an intimate acquaintance 
with this excellent man. As his life was exemplary for humility 
and holiness -, so his writings are no less distinguished by the 
noblest efforts of a powerful intellect, sanctified by the wisdom 
that is from above. His Ecclesiastical Polity will remain- a 



618 NOTES. 

monument of bis greatness and of his victory over his opponents, 
so long as the foundations of Nature's Law are immoveable, and 
the genius of Christianity overshadows the workmanship of her 
own creation. 



P. 108. 1. SI. depart Uberaii^ with iUm.] F^ut and depart 
were formerly synonymous. Instances occur in Chancer and 
Shakespeare. 

** And here Is gold, and that fid gret pl«&ftee. 
That ifaal departed ben among •• threa." 

Cii: C. T. T. 12745— 6. 

** Which we moeh rather had depart withal 
And hare the money by ^nr £aher leot.^ 
Lows Labour Lost. 

" Hath wUnn^y departed with a part.*' 
King John. 

** Faith, %9 1 can hardly depart with ready money." 

Evefy Man Oat of His Hnmocir. 



P. 108. 1. 1. Solve."] This is the only instance of which I am 
aware that a single word has been altered in the text ; the au- 
thors word is soil (soyl) -, its meaning is plainly solve. 

** AUe the clerkes under Crist ne couthc this a eoile 
Bote thus by longeth to by lyve alle that lyketh Dowell." 

Per.— (For suicly no inferior clerk) could ever toive this difficully, but 
thus all who love Dowel are of the familly of true faith. — P. Plouh. p. 191. 



P. 113. 1. 7* meekly knowledge my sinJ] Acknowledge. The 
word frequently occurs in this sense in old writers. See 
pp. 30, 70, 7«, 1^3, &c. 



NOTES. 519 

P. 118. 1. 17. duty,'] any one's due or right. " The curates 
which in every pariah preach the gospel ought of duty to receive 
an honest living for them and their households.*' (pp. 131, 132) 
" When thou receivest money for thy labour or virare thou re- 
rcceivest thy duty:* (p. 138.) " Give to every man therefore 
his duty; tribute to whom tribute belongeth/' &c. (p.225.) *' Let 
kings take their duty of their subjects.** (p. 242.) 



P. 143. 1. 3. A Dun*s manj a disciple of Dun Scotus. — See 
Note to p. 2. 1. 8. 



P. 154. 1. 6. pilled,] or rather, as Mr.^yrwhilt observes, piled ; 
spelt anciently pyld, bald. 

'' Round was his face, and cam use was bis nose. 
As pilled as an ape was his skull." 

Ch. C. T. y. 3933. 

Bald ceremony, (p. 158.) Pilled traditions, (p. 261.) — See 
Note to p. 92. 1. 15. 



P. 1 55. 1. 20. enter this religion or that.] Every reUgion, (p. 
194.) Of whatsoever religion it be, (p. 270.) All our holy religions, 
(p. 285.) Religion is frequently used for a religious order, so 
that there were as many religions as orders : '' as thou seest how 
we are divided into monstrous sects or orders of religion." 
(p. 354.) 

'* Releve re%iofi ; i.e. the needy religious.'* 

P. Plouh. p. 149. 

^' And suthc radde religion hure ruele to holde." 

Par.— <* Afterwards he counselled the religious orders to maintain discipline/' 
ibid. p. 83. 

The passage of which this example is a part contains a very 
extraordinary prediction of the downfall of religious houses* 



5^ NOIISS. 

P. 168, L 94. And the properties of the HehTetD (OM^ue 
Qgreeth a thousand tunes more with the English than wiih the 
Laiin,'] compared with p. 5. ad finemi li it Iikdy that Tyndal€ 
would have spoken thus confidently, had he not been at least 
tolerably well sktlled in the Hebrew } What could induce our 
worthy eccleeiaaticat historian to say, *' I presume be rendered 
it (part of the OSd Testament) out of the Latin, his best friends 
not intitaUng^ hUn to any skill at all in the Hebrew/' It would 
have been better had he g-iven some reference to those writings 
of Tynd ale's friends Mho had made these i as it should seem, un- 
warrantable concessions, if in truth they ever were made. Mr, 
Crntwell in his Preface to bishop Wilson's Bible, only remarks 
on thin presumption of Fuller, that he might be tuislaken. 



P. 189, L IB. One holdcth this doctor another that.] See an 
admirable compendium Lrines of the principal !;choo1* 

men, in the fourih volumt . Turner's History of England 

during the Middle Ages. 



F- 190. I SO. Aristotle.'} " A man must first he well seen in Aris- 
totle, ere he can understund the Scripture, say tliey. Antstotle's 
doctrine is that the world was without beginning/' &c. In bis 
Mammon, he says (see p. 84.) "whatsoever they read in Aristotle 
that must be first true.** — See also pp. 38, 142, 3. 

" The dominion of Aristotle arose and continued, from the per- 
suasion that he was the superior intellect among the ancients, 
and that bis works contained a greater quantity of truth and in- 
formation than those of any other author. This conviction 
prevailed among the Arabians, and over all Europe, as well as 
in England. His philosophy was not adopted here or elsewhere 
because schoolmen taught it, or because the Spanish Arabs pur- 
sued it ', its predominance was founded on the general belief, 
and that upon the practical experience, of its real superiority. 
This common feeling, and its basis, were expressed by the stu- 
dent consulted at Pisa by Montaigne, whose general thesis be 
says, was, ' that the touchstone and standard of all solid ima- 




KOl^S 



ginations and of all truths were, their conformity tn the doc- 
trine of Aristotle i all besides were vain and chimerical, for 
thiit he had seen all, and said alL* 

** To us ihifl character sounds ejttravagant, and we justly deem 
it to be so, because it is no longer applicable and proper ; but 
it was neither untrue nor faalish in the middle ages* No other 
man could then stand in competition with Aristotle^ for 
mind, knowledge, acnteness, judgment, and utility. His books 
actually combined more intellectual excellence and serviceable 
treasures of all sorts than those of any other which had then sur- 
vived ) and they created a mental ability and aiHucnce in the world, 
which without them would not have then existed. He cerUunly 
kept natural philosophy united with religion, and with the belief of 
a soul j or im material principle i and thus, being the antagonist of 
atheism and of materialism, and being an indefatigable searcher 
after intellectual causation, he was perfectly unitable with Chris- 
tianity/' — Turner's History of England, during the middle ages, 
voh Iv. pp. 470, 1, — See the whole chapter, on the Scholastic 
Philosophy. 

I confess, that with all my respect for the candour, the judge- 
men t> and discrimination of the hisiorian, 1 cannot concur 
with his eulogium on the Aristotelian philosophy ; whic:h, 
so far from being " unitable with Christianity/' appears to me 
to have usurped her throne, broken her sceptre, and nearly 
banished her from the understandings and hearts of mankind , 
until the Reformers, taking to themselves the whole armour of 
God, were instrumental in restoring her authority, and giving 
vitality to her institutes. Awakened themselves, by the Scrip- 
tures, to light and liberty, they roused mankind from the slumber 
of ages. The sound of their voice was the breaking down 
of this Gentile wall of partition which separated man from his 
Redeemer, as the apostolic preaching had been of the Jewish , 
which stood between him and his Creator. It is true that his 
Treatise on Morals is one of the most successful efforts of un- 
assisted reason, to teach mankind that the practice of virtue is 
the surest road to happiness. But the self- de pen dance and self- 
sufHcieucy which pervade the system, are essentially at variance 
with the spirit of the Gospel, and incompatible with the graces 
which constitute and adorn the christian character. In his Me- 



1 



^^t NOTES. 

taphyaics he wan tiers into a region of unhallowed spectilatiun9j 
dark J wild, forlorn. The Universe is eternal. The supn^me 
Being dwells in Hs highest habitation. Immoveable himselfi he 
imparts motion to all thing^i^ In proportion as objects are near 
to his seat are they benefitted by Kts energy : hetice the earth 
end its inhabitants being at the greatest distance enjoy the least 
of his influence. This connection is ti n question ably ^ so far mecha* 
nical, as, in reference to the human racej to exclude every idea 
of inspection, moral goyernment, paternity, communication of 
good, or infliction of eyil. And in conformity with this gloomy 
scene, the Deity is so wholly employed in the contemplation of 
his own intellect, as to prevent any attention or regard to any 
thing beyond himself. Thus does " the interpreter of nature," 
frustrate the beneficent design of all her works, resist her un- 
wearied proclamations that the Lord is near to every one of us, 
check the rising desire to seek him, and paralyse the hand that 
is stretched out to feel after him, if haply he may be 
found. What boundless commendations, and what violent 
measures have been resorteil to, in support of the claims of 
the Stagirite on the one hand j and what vehemence of op- 
position on the other, may be seen in Bayle*s Notes to his 
Life* An ample and w^ell written account of him and his writings 
15 given in Rees's Cyclopffidia, from which a few sentences may 
be extracted in confirmation of Tyndale's assertions respecting 
his doctrine of the origin of the worlds the necessity of the Al- 
mlghty*s acts, and his indi£ference to human concerns. " From 
the preceding cursory view of his system/* says the writer, *' it 
appears that it does not exclude the idea of deity, for he speaks 
of the First Mover as a being distinct from the world, separate 
from matter, and possessing intellect, desire, and a power of 
communicating motion } upon whom the universe is dependent, 
not as upon an animating principle, but an external moving 
power. This being he represents as superior to all other in- 
telligent natures, and calls him God. At the same time Aris- 
totle's notion of a deity cannot be reconciled with just con- 
ceptions of the divine nature and attributes. Although he makes 
God the cause of all motion, yet, by supposing the universe to 
have existed from all eternity, he divests him of the glory of 
creation, and connects him with a world already formed by a 



NCyfES, 



533 



L'Uiiiii of neceaaity, for i 



than to make hkrn the 



I 

I 

I 



L>ther purpose 

first spring of a vast rattchiae. God indeed, in the system of 
Aristotle^ ia immutable ) so is likewise the celestial sphere in 
which he is supposed to reside. In producing^ motion, he acts 
neeessunly j and eteroally employed in the contemplation of his 
of¥n nature, he observes nothings and cares for nothing beyond 
himself. Possessing neither immensity nor omnipresence, and 
far removed from the inferior parts of the universe, he is not 
even a spectator of its inhabitants and their concerns, and cannot 
therefore be a proper object of reverence and, worship, 

" It does not certainly appear from the writings of Aristotle, 
whether he thought the soul of man mortal or immortal ^ but 
the former appears most probable, from his notion of the nature 
and origin of the human loul, which he conceived to be an in- 
tellectual power, externally transmitted into the human body 
from an eternul intelligence^ the common source of rationality 
to human beings. We have no evidence that he supposed the 
union of this principle with any individual to continue after 
death.— ^ Upon the w hole, it has been observed by competent 
and candid judges, that the philosophy of Aristotle ia rathtr the 
philosophy of words than of thingi, and that the study of his 
writings tends more to perplex the understanding with subtle 
diitinctions than to enlighten it with real knowledge. The ve- 
neration that was paid to him in the Arabian, Jewish^ and 
Christian Schools, was rather the means of obstructing than of 
aidmg and promoting the progress of useful science. It was 
not J as an excellent biographer remarks, till mankind were 
emancipated from their vassalage to Aristotle, that the human 
mind asserted its native freedom and dignity^ and that genuine 
science began to enlighten the world." 

Mosheim says in his Ecclesiastical History of the Xlllth 
Century : ** The Latin writers of this age complain in many 
places of the growth of infidelity, of daring and licentious 
writers, some of whom attacked publicly the doctrines of 
Christianity, while others went so far as atheistically to call in 
question the perfections and government of the Supreme Being. 
These complaints, however they might have been exaggerated 
in some respects^ were yet far from being entirely destitute of 



524 



NOTES. 



foundation ; and the euperslitiuo of the times was too naturalljr 
adapted to create zi number of infidels and libertines^ amoug 
men who had more capacity than judgment^ more wit than so^ 
lidLty, Persons of this character, when they fixed their attention 
only upon that absurd syslera of religion which the Roman 
pon tiffs and their dependants exhibited as the true religion of 
Christ, and main tamed by the odious influence of bloody perse- 
cution ; we re J for want of the means of being instructed^ un- 
happily led to consider the Christian religion as a fable invented 
and propagated by a greedy and ambitious priesthood^ in order 
to Oil their coffers and to render their authority respectable. 
The pbiloBopby of AristotlCj which flourished in all the European 
schools, and waalooketl upon as the very essence of right reason, 
contributed much to support this delusion, and to nourish a 
proud and presumptuous spirit of infidelity. This quibbling and 
intricate philosophy, led many to reject some of the most evi- 
dent and important doctrines bath of natural and revealed re- 
ligion, such as the doctrine of a divine providence governing 
the universe, the immortality of the soul, the Scripture account 
of the origin of the world, and other points of less moment. 
These doctrines were not only rejected, but the most pernicious 
errors propagated in opposUioa to them by a set of Aristotelians^ 
who were extremely active in gaming proselytes to their im- 
pious jargon/' — Mosb. Eccl Hist, vol. iii< p* 146, 7- — See bis 
account of the Aristotelians, in the XVth Century, taken from 
Brucker's Hkioria Critica Phitosopkid:, torn, iv, p. 158, 

The importance of the subject, and its close connection with 
my author who has so frequently and strongly expressed his 
sentiments on the pernicious influence of the prevailing authority 
of Aristotle/ will, I trusty make an apology needless for pursuing 
this theme a little farther. The following paragraphs, taken 
from that part of Brucker*s Work to which Mosheim refers, are 
from Enfield's perspicuous pages, to whom the English reader 
is greatly indebted for his translation, or rather hts faithful re- 
presentation of the meaning and spirit of the original. In the 

*Tyndalc appears to hare adopted the phraseology of Ldthcr in liis ceo- 
snres of Ariatatle — See Gerd. Hist. Re form, torn. i. pp. HB, 13?, 8. torn. iU 
f ^ 11. Seqkendorf, p. 2$* a. Loeacheri Act«t Docum. T, i. p- 512; 3> 



NOTES. 



525 



Section on the Revival of the Aristotelian Philosophy, he ob- 
ierves ^ 

*' The general prepossession in favour of the Aristotelian 
aystem, which from these and other causes prevailed for several 
centuries after the revival of letters, was attended with much 
inconvenience and mischief. The reformers of philosophy ob- 
serving that the Scholastics, in order to harmonize the Aria- 
toteliaii system with the doctrines of CUristianity, hud repre- 
sented the Stu^irite under fictitious colourS:^ determined to em- 
brace his real tenets as they are found In his writings* Whence 
they imbibed opinions from the Peripatetic philosophy wholly 
inconsistent with true religion ; such as for e?tample^ that Godj 
the first mover^ wholly intent upon the contemplation of his 
own intellect, disregards the a^airs of the world j that the ni^ 
telligence which presides over the lower sphere, is the universal 
soul of the world, of which all men partake | and, consequently, 
that the soul of man has no distinct existence^ and will no longer 
subsist as suchj than whilst the body continues to live. These, 
and other similar tenets, were commonly embraced by the 
modern Peripatetics, especially in Italy, who thought that they 
paid sufficient respect to religion, if they pretended, as Christians, 
to embrace a different creed, though they were not able to re- 
concile it with the dogmas which they were taoght by reason 
and philosophy- In this manner, Pomponaiius, Caesalpinus, 
Cremonius, and othersj cast the thin vail of religious profession, 
over real infidelity. This mischief proceeded to such an ejt' 
treme, that the minds of the mnltitude, both ecclesiaities and 
laity, were at this time deeply tinctured with atheism j and this 
fatal relaxation of principle produced an uncommon depravity 
of manners. A regard to the providence and authority of God, 
and the fear of future punishmeut, having almost wholly lost 
their influence upon the minds of those who still called them- 
selves, not only philosophers, but Christians j sobriety and de- 
cency were abandoned in their conversation, and the grossest 
impiety and obscenity disgraced their writings. 

'* This swelling torrent of profaneness, the fathers of the La- 
teran council in vain endeavoured to stem, by a bull, which, in the 
year one thousand, five hundred, and ten^ was issued against the 




BW NOTES. 

Aristotelmn eorruptlong. The Penpatetics ridiculed tlib idle 
fulmiDfitipPj for they were not ig;norant, that the Pontiff bim- 
selfj Leo X. find the Cardinal^ Peter Bemho, hy ivhom the bull 
was issued, lay under a strong suspicion of being themselves 
infidels. Subsequent ecclesiastical decrees lopped ofiT some of 
the branches of spreading impiety^ but no one saw the necefisity, 
or bad the coumge to root up the tree. The public guardians 
of religion were, or Beenied to be, ignorant that the errors of 
the Aristoteliau philosophy lay at the foundation of this cor- 
ruption. Themselves infected with the disease which they un- 
dertook to cure^ if the Christian faith was professed in words, 
they thought it of little consequence what tenets were in reaUty 
believed. In order to throw dust into the eyes of the people, 
the ecclesiastics professed to yield such implicit submission to 
the authority of the church, as to embrace its decrees^ though 
they were wholly irreconcileable with the invincible reasoninga 
of the Peripatetic schools. Under this mask they did not scruple 
publicly to defend any kind of impiety, only adding this caution, 
that tbey proposed i^ositions of this kind merely in a way of 
speculation, and though tbey might be true according to Aris- 
totle^ they were false according to the decisions of the church,, 
to which they humbly submitted, though they were not able to 
discover the reasons upon which they were founded. Such pi- 
tiful evasions, though they might suffice to secure the credit of 
the church among an ignorant populace, proved highly in- 
jurious to good morals, by encouraging fraud and hypocrisy. 
The motto of Cremonius seems to have expressed the general 
sense of the Peripatetic clergy of this period, Intus ut Ubet,foriM 
ut moris est, * Abroad, with the people ; at home^ as you 
please.* 

*' The Stagirite, having for many centuries, possessed authority 
in the schools, little inferior to that of Jesus Christ in the 
church, and his dogmas being intimately interwoven with those 
of religion, it was thought exceedingly hazardous to whisper 
any thing to the discredit of his philosophy. The learned Be- 
rigard, who was sensible of many errors in this system, declares/ 
* that in lecturing upon Aristotle, he did not think himself at li- 

' Praef. Circul. Piaan! 




NOTES. 527 

berty to give his opinion, lest he should be thought to treat his 
master with contempt/ and to trample upon the ashes of the an^ 
cients.' This reverence for Aristotle was still supported in 
popish universities, by statutes which required the professors to 
promise upon oath, that in their public lectures on philosophy 
they would follow no other guide. It is easy to perceive that, 
if freedom of speech, even at the very fountain head of in- 
struction, was thus restricted, there could be little scope for 
freedom of enquiry, and little probability of the advancement 
of knowledge.'*— Enfield's Hist, of Phil. vol. ii. p. 438,-41. 

The founder of the Lyceum was forsaken, I believe, by all 
the first Reformers, with the exception of Melancthon, who at 
first, probably in deference to Luther, joined with the general 
voice, but afterwards pursued an opposite course. He thus 
wrote to the Chancellor of Bavaria in 1535 : " Vere judicas 
plurimum interesse Reipublicse ut Aristoteles conservetur, et 
extet in scholis ac versetur in manibus discentium. Nam pro- 
fecto sine autore, non solum non retineri pura philosophia, sed 
ne quidem justa discendi ratio uUa poterit." — Melanc« Epist. 
ad Leonhardum Eccium. 

Time and experience have decided whose wisdom was the 
most comprehensive, and whose course the most beneficial to 
mankind, Melancthon's 5 or Luther's, Calvin's, Zuinglius's and 
those who adopted their views and assisted in carrying them 
into execution. I shall conclude this note with the approving 
testimony of an eloquent writer to the triumph of their prin- 
ciples over the long established system of the despotic^ Stagirite. 
'' The renunciation in a great part of Europe, of theological 
opinions so long consecrated by time^ and the adoption of a 
creed more pure in its principles and more liberal in its spirit, 
could not fail to encourage on all other subjects, a congenial 

* Ne in magiBtrum despuere, et apolactizare, ut ait Plautai , Telle ridear. 

^ This epithet seemi as applicable to the philosopher personally, as to the 
-manner in which his authority was maintained by his followers. His object 
was to erect his own edifice upon the ruin of every other structure. As Lord 
Bacon has finely remarked, ** Like a Turkish despot, he thought he conld 
not reign secure, unless all his brethren were slain." — Dt Augment. Scient. 1. 
iii. c. 4. Enfield*s Hist vol. i. p. 267. 




*>98 NOTES. 

Ireedom of enquiry. These cireumstanees operated etill mare 
directly and powerfully by thetr inflaence in undermining the 
authority of Aristotle ^ an authority, which, for many years was 
scarcely ' inferior to that of the Scriptures, and which, in aome 
unirersitics, was supported by statutes, requiring the teachers 
to proETiise upon oath, that in their public lectures they would 
follow no other guide,'* Stewart's Dissert, on the Progress of 
Mental Philosophy, p. ^^^ 



P, 190. 1. 11. Hliat LI the cause thai tee damn s&me of Origeai 
^orkM and uiiow sowie,] This example^ as one of the most 
striking, is selected to show the common use of the word i in 
almost every instance where it occurs in this volume, the word 
ctmdemn, would now take its place. The reader must not forget 
to give Dr, Ridley the benefit of this remark. Note to p. 1. L 5« 
Nor the submissive husband, p. 369*— See pp, 85,90, 109, 141, 
151, 158, 159, &c. Among the articles commenced against 
Klchard Hunue after hie death were these i 

/^ew,— he diimneih adoration, prayer, kneeling^ and offering 
to images, which he calleth stocks and stones. 

ili^tttf — he damiiMh the University of Oxford ^ with all degrees 

* « Scarcely inferior •/' not at all, according to Bayle, who says, 
** It will be an everlasting subject of wonder to persons who know what 
philosophy is, to find that Aristotle's authority was so much respected in the 
Schools, for several age«, that when a disputant quoted a passage from this 
philosopher, he who maintained the Thesis, durst not say TVanseat, but must 
either deny tlie passage, or explain it in his own way. If any one think fit to 
contest this fact I refer him to several Courtet of PMlotopky, printed in the 
XVIth century, where this method is found to have been in use. The author 
proves his thesis first by authority, and afterwards by reason. The autho- 
ritative proof are passages out of Aristotle, which seem to oppose the Thesis, 
and which are authoritative proofs for the other party. Afterwards an an- 
swer is given to the reasons ; but great care is taken never to say, / own that 
Aristotle believed so and so ; nevertheless^ I deny that my Thesis wherein I 
maintain another doctrine , is false. All endeavours are made use of to give 
the objected passages such a sense as may agree with the matter in question. 
The same method is still in use among those of the Church of Rome, in the 
Divinity Schools, with regard to St. Augustin^ aud Thomas Atjuhias** 




NOTES. 629 

and fiiculties in it, as Art, Civill, Canon, and Divinity ; saying, 
that *' they let the true way to come to the knowledge of the 
lawes of God, and holy Scripture/'— Fox. vol. ii.p. 18. Ed. 1641. 



P. 199. 1. 3. to wite,'\ to impute to -, to blame. 

« Though that I be jalous wite me noaght.'* 

Ch.C. T. ▼. 10051. 

*' Bote ich had wedir at my wil, ich wited God the cause 
And alle maner ang^res." 

Par.— For unless I had weather at my will, 1 imputed it to God, as well 
as every other cause of anger which I felL—P. Plouh. p. 93. 



P. 199. 1. 6.— pp. «57, 339, 48. never Ihelater.'] Nevertheless. 
Except in Tyndaic this word is of rare occurrence. 



P. 200. L 35. our even Christian,] our fellow Christian. " Des- 
pitous, is he that hath disdain of his neighebour, that is to saye, 
of his even Cristen." — Chaucer's Persones Tale. vol. iv. p. 41. 

" Also thou shelt not swere for envie, neyther for feivour, ne 
for mede, but only for right wisenesse, and for declaring of trouthe 
to the honour and worship of God, and to the aiding and helping 
of thin even Cristen. And therefore every man that taketh Goddea 
name in idel, or falsely swereth with his mouthy or elles taketh 
on him the name of Crist, to be called a Cristen man, and liveth 
against Cristes living and his teching, all they take Goddes 
name in idel. — p. 65. 

'^ And shrewede myn em critiyne agfaens the consail of Crist.** 

Par, — And cursed my fellow Christians, agunst the law of Chritt.— P. 
Plouh. p. 91. 

*' You might say that I, heyng put in so speciall a trust as I 
am in this case, were no trustie frende to you, nor charitable 

VOL. II. 2 M 



530 NOTES. 

man to mine evm ChrUiian" — Henry the Ei gilt's answer to f^f- 
Hament in 1546, — Hall's Chronicles, toL 26i, 

2nd ClowD. — *' Will you Ua' ibe trutb ooH ? If this lufcd not licen a gcalle- 
woninti^ Bb(! shouM hare hvcn burled out of cbristUu bunid." 

Ut Clowa. — " Why there tboti aay'sit ■ And the more pity ; that great folkes 
shall hAve couDtcnance in this wuf Id to drown or bang them^elrei, inore 
Ihaa tbeir even Christian.^' ^Htkmlet. Act v, Sc, L 



P* MS- L$,€i doling in the head. P, S55. admed in the hramf.'} 
StupiRed. Dazed, Mr* Todd abaerves, is still used in this 
sense in the north of England. 

** Tbfls in Eieiij>vfli?nes soro was I cnsed 
And inn grcXf}y adujed.*' 

Poems supposed to be ' Chaucer. Todd*s Illust, p. ^97- 



P, 204. h 36* p.4lLl« 6, mU^'] anciently spelt saute j lecherxiut, 

'* All tlie tliAmis of lore. 
Salt Cleopatra, soften tby wan'd lip." 

Aot. and Cleop. Act ii. Sc. 1. 

This is one article of the Table of Contents of " Yet a course 
at the Romyshe Fox.'* 

" Sawte bytche of my lorde Bonner." Sec p. 77—80. 



P. ?09. 1. 28. egal,] equal ; ofteu used by old writers. 



p. 815. I. 17. to set forth a nech-verte to save all manner of 
tresspassers from the fear of the sword, S(c. p. 276. They have 



NOTES. 531 

o ianctuary for thee ; yea, and a neck-verse, \f ihifm canst but 
read a Utile Latin, though it be never so sorrily, so that you be 
ready to receive the beasfs markJ] Neck-verse derived its name 
from the circumstance of the prisoner saving his neck^ that is 
escaping hanging, by repeating it. 

In the character of a " Jaylor** in a curious book entitled 
*' Whimsies : or, a New Cast of Characters/' 12mo» Lond. 
1631^ p. 69. is the following passage. " If any of his more 
happy prisoners be admitted to his Clergy, and by helpe of a 
compassionate prompter, hacke out his Neck-verse, hee has a cold 
Iron in store, if he be hot ; but a hot Iron if he be cold. If 
his pulse (I mean his purse) bee hot, his Fist may cry fizze, 
but want his impression : but if his pulse be cold^ the poor beg- 
garly knave must have his literal expression." 

In the British Apollo, voL iii. fol. Lond. 1710. no. 72. is the 
following query. 

*' fi* Apollo prepare ; PU make yoa to stare ; 
For I'll put you to your Neck Verte, 
Howe*er you harangue, you'U eertainly hang, 
Except yon the matter reheane < 

And that is to tell, (and pray do it well. 

Without any banter I charge ye; 
Why the Neck Ferte is sud, and when it was made 

7%e benefit of tke clergy f 

A. When Popery long since, with tenets of nonaeme 
And ignorance filled the land, 
And Latin alone, to Church -men was known. 
And the reading a legible hand : 

This priyilege then to save learned men 

Was granted 'em by Holy Chur^ 
While yillains whose crimes were lesser niat times 

Were certainly left in the lurch. 

If a Monk had been taken for stealing of bacon. 

For Burglary, Murder, or Rape : « 

If he could but rehearse, (well prompt) his Neck Verte 
He nerer could fail to escape. 
2m2 





S5t NOTES. 

WUea llie world ^revf mori? wiec and witb open eyes. 

Were able t£) sec ifaroiigh t1i& mlat, 
*rvrns Ibought 'a just to sAt-c a Imty^'knar^i 

Aa well as a rascally prieai,** 

Sir Walter Scott nntkea the Neck Verse as a cant terto 
furiDerly used by Ihe marautlers tin the. bortier, 

" Letter nor luie know I Qerer a onr 
Wer*t my Nrt^k Verse at Harribce/' 

Lay of the Last Minslrulj C. L 24. 

ANot€ says t " Harribee, the place of executing the Border 
Marauders at Carlisle.'* 

The Neck Ferae is the hegiuning of the fifi^-JkU Pmlm, Misere 
itiei> &c, anciently read by criminals claiming' the benefit of 
Clergy .^ — Brand's Obs. on Pop* Ant* vol* ii* p. 667* 



P. S21. U 6. Smhm€Ti,'\ These Socheners, (or as they are 
Bpelled Smhenartt Edit. 157^. Southenars Edit 1535,) have given 
me no little trouble ^ but want of time precludes my farther in- 
vestigation of their character ami country. The most probable 
conjecture I can form of the derivation of the word, is, that it 
is a noun formed from the German verb tuchen, to $eek, which 
is almost endless in the variety of its significations as applied 
to particular objects and circumstances. 

'' SucHEN, proprie est ocuUs qtuerere, ab atig, ook, och, oculus, 
prseposito sibilo, et dicitur per translationem de omnibus quse- 
rendi modis quocunque sine institutis. Hinc ilia significationum 
incredibilis multitudo, quia causa qusereudi raria esse potest." 
" Among these are : — Suchen, qusre infestandi causa, aliaa 
invaders, insultare, Verelius in Ind. Sokn insultus, invasio 
hostilis, sokndiarfur ad in\iadendum audax.'* 

" SucHEN, quaerere, occupandi causa, alias oppugnare, Hinc 
migratio Gentium Anglosaxonibus dicitur Land-socn, quasi re- 
gionis inhabitandi gratia invasio et oppugnatio.'* — Wacbter 
Glossar. German. Lips. 1737- p. 1642, — 4. 




NOTES. 



&33 



The French word tochon may be noticed : " Socsoir ; com- 
pagnon, nsscici^, camBrade^ ami." — Roqtiefort and Carpentiers 

French Glossaries, 

But I hope it will be found to be an old English or Norman- 
Saxon word, for I am desirous of retaining' the opinioti which I 
have formed, that Tyndale preserved the purity of bis native 
language in as high a degree as any of his con tern porarieSi The 
Saxon Secan, Soeciinj Secean, is the same with the German Sit- 
chen, and I have met with a solitary instance of the word Souchen 
in Piers Plouhman, which in the Glossary Dr, Whi taker has 
defined " to follow ;" in the text it reads thus : 

" And yiit more bit makelh id en meay tyme and olte 
To fljQegen &nd to lottckm sotelteefl of gyk 
For covety^e of that cat«l lo culletbem that bit kepcth." 

^fij^.— But wttal is vroT^f w£:alt1i many times tempta tntn to ain, and to 
sfek subtilties and tricks, aod for coFetousness of tho«e ckatteU, to kill the 
owner, p. 214, 

The context both here and in the Practice of Prelates (see 
pp. 445, 446, 455,) where Tyndale again mentions the sochmers, 
and calls them the pope's old friends, points Ihem cot as aux- 
iliary troops, I was not aware until I received the following 
obliging communication from Mr. Sharon Turner, that the term 
could refer to any others than the Swiss mercenaries. " Both 
the emperor and his opponents, and among these the pope, used 
to resort to Germany for hired soldiery for their armies, and I 
have found these to be called by several different names, of 
which sockenars seems to he one, — a kindred word to that of our 
ancient land tenantry, sochemans'' 

1 have only farther to remark, that in the Royal Library 
( Cos ley's Cat. 14. A. vL) is an Italian translation in 
M<8. of the Christian Obedience, by Sebastiano Eoccatagliata^ 
dedicated " Al nobiie, et honorato aignore il signore Thomaso 
Copley o,** and dated 33 rU June 155E>, in which socheners h 
rendered by Suizzeri. ** Se gli Veneliani si accostano troppo, 
bisogna, che gU vesconi Francesi conduchino dentro 1 re di 
Francia, et li Suizzeri sono mandati a chiamare per venire al 
soccorso ; ct per la loro fatica gU da a chi una rosa^ a chi una 
birettti di mantcnuta.*' 




6S4 



NOTES. 



P. 291. I 8* /ifi giveth to some a rose,^ A goUleo rase which the 
pope blesses at mass, od the first Sunday in licnt, while thi*y 
sing Lffltare Jerusalem , aud which, after mass, be carries io 
procession j and then sends as a present to sume soi^ereign 
prince. — Vide, Pet, Frizonius in Gallia purpurata, p, 8L Liber 
Sacrarum cerimoniarum. Lib. L sect* vih cap, v, p. 38S — 4, 
Edit. Hofbaannianae^ toni. H. 

Pope Julius the lid senta g(>^e7j Hose to Henry the VUItbj 
with a letter to archbishop Warham, directing him to present it 
to the king at high mass with his apostolical benedictiDn, (cum 
cereniortus in notula alliga contentts) stating that it had been 
blessed by his hands^ sprinkled with odoriferous musk> and 
anointed with holy chrism. The letter is dated April 5th, 
1510.— Wilk. Concil. voh iii. p. 659, 

Leo the Xth in a letteti with a golden Hose sent to Albertus 
Mogutitinus, dated June 6, 1520, thus commends the precious 
gift; — <f Quare Circumspect lo Tua gratiim illud munus accipiet, 
quod etsi mysticum est magnasque habet in ie sacrarum rerum 
interpretationes, tamen ad celenxs adjunctum, Cist pignus amoris 
summi in Te noatri,*' — Vide Gerdes Hist. Reform, torn- IL D, 
10. He also sent one, but too late for his purpose, to the 
Elector Frederic, ibid* toni. L p. 93L 

Ibid, capo/ main tenancet'] or cap of state j one of the regalia 
or oruainents of statc^ carried before kings at their coronation 
and other great solemnities. It was formerly esteemed a badge 
and symbol of dignity, and suitable Lo a prince of the blood. It 
was worn by the kings of England from Edward Hi. to Ed- 
ward VI. but of late it hath been granted to private ikmilies^ 
The cap of mamienance is also carried in the processions of the 
mayors of several cities of England . It is made of crimson 
velvety faced up ermine^ with two points to the back, — See 
Hees*9 CycL 



P, %29, 1. 3S. " The very prtlatti ate ntm mo More changed 
thai if ihey smdl tluii one of iheir Jhck do bui onee long or de- 
itre for the true knowledge of Chrkt, iheif wiU $lay him, 
burning fum with fire mo^^ cruei^f,*'] The reader of English 



NOTES. 535 

Church History, in perasiDg this passage cannot £ail of being 
forcibly reminded of an expression of Nix, bishop of Norwich, in a 
letter to archbishop Warbam, that he had heard of no clerk that 
bad lately come from Gun well Flail, Cambridge, '' but he saverith 
of the frying panne, though bespeak never so holely.'*— Strype's 
Cranmer. Oxon. 1819, p. 694. Nix regarded thebujringup and 
destroying of Tyndale's translation of theTestament '' a gradouse 
and a blessed dede,'* for which those who were concerned should 
be highly rewarded of the Almighty. — See Mem. of Tyn- 
dale, &c. — ^For notices of Nix, see Bale's Course at a Romish 
Fox. fol. 69 'y Wharton's Angl. Sacr. Pars. i. p. 419 ; Godwin! 
Prss. Angl. p. 440 ; Fox's Acts and Mon. vol. ii. p. 976, Edit 
1641 ', Strype's Cranmer, p. 40 — 9, and Soame's History of the 
Reformation, vol. i. p. 497. 

Say not then, what is the cause that the former days were 
better than these ? So thou dost not inquire wisely concerning 
this. (Eccles. vii. 10.) What a happy revolution has succeeded 
the '' sore change " which Tyndale lamented, in the character 
of the prelates in his days from their primitive predecessors ! 
Compare or rather contrast Nix, for instance, with Bathurst 
The one, kindling with blind fury the fires of persecution, 
burning the Scriptures and their adherents together ^ unfeeling^ 
bigotted, licentious : — the other, zealously patronising institu- 
tions for the distribution of the word of God to " every man 
in bis own tongue wherein he was born ;" devoting his talentfi, 
and the influence of his station, to maintain the rights and pri- 
vileges, and to promote the harmony, welfare, and happiness 
of all classes of his fellow christians ; distinguished by the most 
amiable and venerable qualities, an example of enlightened be- 
nevolence, candour, moderation, integrity and piety. The one 
a curse, and the other a blessing to the church and the world. 

'' O Lord, we beseech thee to keep thy churcb and hous^ 
hold continually in thy true religion, that they who do lean 
only upon the hope of thy heavenly grace, may evermore be 
defended by thy mighty power, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Amen." 

Collect for the fifth Sunday after the Epiphany .—See Dr. Chal- 
mer's Sermon, on the Respect due to Antiquity, p. SS, 58. 



53# 



NOTES, 



P. 937* L 1, £rf Chrktian landlords k conimt with ihek tmi 
and M mitomsJl " My father was a yoman, and had no landed 
of hys owne j onely he bad a farme of iij, or iiij, pound by yeare 
at the utternnostj and hereupon he Itlled so mucbe as kept half a 
dosson men. He had walke for an hundred sheepe, and tny 
mother milked xkx* kyne» He was able, and did fiiide the king 
a harnesse with him selfe and his horse, white he cxune to the 
place that he should receyue the kinges wages. I can re- 
member^ that 1 buckled his hamesie, when he went unto 
Blacke heath fielde* He kept me to schole, or els I had not 
been able to have preached before the kinges majestie now. He 
maryed my sisters witb five pound, or xx. nobles a ptcce^ 
so that he brought them in godlinesse and feare of God, He 
kept hospitality for his poore neignboures. And iiome almes he 
gave to the poore : and all thys did he of the sayde farme. 
Where he that now hath it^ payeth xvi. pound by the ycare or more, 
and is not able to doe any thyng for hys prince j for him selfe^ 
nor for his children, or geve a cup of drinke to the poore* 

'' Thus all the enhaunsing and rearing goeth to your private 
com modi tie and wealth * So that where ye had a single too 
muchj you have that : and since the same^ ye have enhaunced 
the rent, and so have encreased an other too much : so now ye 
have double too much, which is too much. But let the preacher 
preach till his tongue be worn to the stompes, nothyng is 
amended;* — Lat Ser, fol 30. b. Edit, 1575, 



P. 248, L \X friars stnd ihtir Umiters to gather their brother- 
hoodi J- which must obey whether they will or not.'] The office 
of a limiier might be, strictly speaking, confined to his begging 
for, and coUeeting the dues of, his convent in a certain district. 
For this he had probably the licence of his superiors, and was 
subject to their mandates and the rules of his house in the ex* 
ecution of his commission* It is not unlikely there were several* 



' Ctiaucer iati mates how titimcrous they were m Ids time. TLe wife of 
Biitlj siiyi they had tnken the pliiCL'a of the Elv€s of former days. 
*< For now lb« priitc chai'Uec jtnil praycrca 
Of Hmitourea aad other holv frerea. 



NOTES- 657 

limiteri in every convent, and that they were sent out in different 
directions, each having his prescribed limits for the performance 
of his office. In the '* Sompnoures Tale" the limiter came his 
round in about a fortnight : 

*' O dere midster, quod this sike man, 
How have ye faren sin that March began, 
I saw you not this fourtene night and more." v. 7363—5. 

That they were beggars, and that the mouth of their bag was 
open for all manner of things, *' a bushel of whete^ or malt, or 
reye, a Goddes kichel, or a trippe of chese, a Goddes halfpeny, 
or a masse peny -, or braun, or a-dagon of a blanket -, or bacon, 
or beef 5'* that nothing came amiss, and that it never said. It is 
enough, is well known. But the gathering their brotherhoods, is 
another feature of their character, another branch of their duty 
which requires explanation. That individuals who contributed 
liberally to a particular convent were received into the brother^ 
hood, and invested with all the privileges of the com- 
munity, without leaving their ordinary residences and occu- 
pations, appears from a letter under the seal of the Prior given in 
Steven's Supplement to Dugdale, voL ii. App. p. 3T0. *' Fratres 
PrcBfUcatores, Warwice, admittunt Thomam Cannings et uxorem 
ejus Agnetem ad participationem omnium bonorum operum con- 
' ventus ejusdem" It is dated 4 Non. Oct. An. Dom. 1347. The 
Sompnour says that his limiter professed to grant this privilege 
to those who gave him alms, and deceived them by writing their 

That serclien every land and every streme 

As thickke as motes in the sonne heme, 

filissing halles, chambres, kichenes, and bouers, 

Citees and burgbes, casdes highe and touers, 

Thropes and hemes, shepencs and dairies. 

This maketh that ther ben no faeries : 

For ther as wont to walken was an elf, 

Ther walketh now the limitour himself. 

In uodermeles and in morweninges, 

And saith bis Matines and his holy thinges. 

As he goth in his limitatioun." 

V. 6447,-5y. 



£38 NOTES, 

naaies oa hb tables of ivory j but having obtaiaed hisobjecl, 
emsed ttiem as soon as he was out of &i^ht. Robert Lan^land 
aoiiie where says, that in his time they courted the rich to 
become of their brotherhood j and of course tinder the plea of 
benefiting the whole community^ of which they now formed a 
part, a continued coutributiou w^as expected, if not enjoined. 
The Umiter brought home all he collected by every means^ or 
paid a rent for his district, and ap|)ropriated to his own private 
use the profit he made by bis bargain. The Friar in the Can- 
terbury Pilgrimage thus turned bis talents to his own advantage, 
and perhaps his brethren were no losers : — 

*< He wu the besle bagger in all bii hous : 
And ho ^ave a £^rtiuDe ieTtat for tUe g^rmit, 
Non of Ilia brctherea cnmi^ id Lia haunt. 
For though a widewt^ haddehut a bhoo, 
(So pksnut waa hia Im pnneipio) 
Yet wohJ he have a ferthing or he went* 
His pourchaa was wet better than hii reot/' 

Our Hmifer although represented in the text as constrained 
to go when and where the friars sent him j out of his college 
vras no mean personage, but n^ade a distinguished fignre in the 
world. He was an M. A. ;■ a preacher of charity sermons j** acon-^ 



• ** "Sow, maister, quod this lord, I you beseke. 
No maister} sire, quod he, but servitour. 
Though I have had in scole that honour. 
God liketh not, that men us Rabi call. 
Neither in market, ne in your large hall." 

r. 77G6r70, 



k <c 



And so befell that on day this frere 
Had preched at a chirche in his manere, 
And specially aboven every thing 
Excited he the peple in his preching 
To trentals, and to gire for Goddes sake, 
Whcrwith men migbten holy houses make." 

y. 7295,-300. 



NOTES. 639 

fessor granting easy terms of absolution 5"" a facetious story- 
teller/ could sing a good song, or play skilfully on an instru- 
ment 3* could dissemble/ gloss/ pray/ and profess ex- 



* " For he had power of confession. 

As said himselfe, more than a curat. 
For of his ordre he was licenciat. 
Ful swetely herde he confession, 
And plesant was bis absolution 
He was an esy man to give penance 
Ther as he wiste to han a good pitance.'* 

V. 218,-24. 

* ** But if it like unto thb compagnie, 

1 wol you of a Sompnour tell a game." 

y. 6860,-1. 

* *< And certainly he hadde a mery note. 

Wei coude he sing^ and plaien on a rote. 
Of yeddinges he bare utterly the pris." 

y. 235,-7. 

' " I shall him tellen which a gret honour 
It is to be a flatering limitour.** 

y. 6875,_6. 

*' This sike man woxe wel neigh wood for ire, 
He wolde that the frere had ben a-fire 
With his false dissimulation." 

V. 7703,-5. 

* « Closing is a ful glorious thing certain. 

For letter sleth, so as we clerkes sain." 

r. 7375,-6. 

^ « God wot, quod he, laboured haye I ful sore. 
And specially for thy salyation 
Haye I sayd many a precious orison. 
And for our other frends, God hem blesse." 

y. 7366,-9. 



NOT£S. 541 

Skinner supposes that this was a seUer of indulgences, thus 
denominated as Imiting or fiung the price for each sin. Junius 
defines the term as denoting a friar or monk who discharged 
his office within certain Wnits or bounds. From the visions of 
P. Ploughman, it appears, indeed, that the Umitour was properly 
a confessor, who, by virtue of episcopal letters, although he 
had no parochial charge, was authorized to hear confession and 
grant absolution within a certain district. R. de Langland 
describes him metaphorically in allusion to a surgeon. 

" Conscience called a leche that coulde well thriue 

Go salueth tho that sick ben, and through syn wounded. 
Shrift sbope sharpe salue, and made hem do penaunce. 

For her mlsdedes that they wrought had 

The frere hereof harde, and hyed hym full fait 

To a lord for a letter, leaue to haue curen, 

As a curatour he were ; and came with his letters. 

Boldly to the bishop, and hys briefe had 

In countrys there he came in con/ettton to here," 

The writer then gives a character of a friar of this description ; 
which, in that age, it may be supposed, was by no means sin-« 
gular. 

** I knew such one once, not eyght winters passed, 
Came in thus coped, at a court where I dwelled. 
And was my lordes leche, and my ladyes both. 
And at last this Umitour, tho my lorde was oute, 
He salued so our women, till some were with childe. 
■ Here is contrition, quod conscience, my consin sore wounded, ' 

Comfort him, quod conscience, and take keep to hys soores. 
The plasters of the Person, and ponders beaten to sore. 
He letteth hem lig ouer long, and loth is to chaunge hem. 
From lenten to lenten his plasters biten. 
That is ouer long, quod this iimitor, I leue I shall amend it ; 
And goeth and gropeth (Contrition, and gaue him a plaster 
Of a priuy payment, and I shall pray for you. 
Thus he goth, and gathereth, and gloseth ther he shriueth. 
Till contrition had cleane forgotten to crie, and to wepe, 
And wake for his workes, as be was wont to do." 

P. Plotth. fol. ult. Edit 1561. 



NOTES. 543 

I was called (I say) to one of my kinsfolke^ which was very 
sicke^ and dyed immediately after my commyng. Now there 
was an old cousin of myne^ whiche after the man was dead, 
gave me a waxe candle in my hand, and commaunded me to 
make certain crosses over him that was dead : for she thought 
the devill should runne away by and by. Now I tooke the 
candell, but I could not crosse him as she would have me to 
doe, for I had never sene it afore. Now she perceivyng that I 
could not do it, with a great anger tooke the candell out of 
my hand, saying : It is pitie that thy father spendeth so much 
money upon thee : and so she took the candcU and crossed and 
blessed him, so that he was sure inough. No doubt she 
thought that the devill could have no power against him.*' — 
p. 198. Edit. 1583. 

" If you look in the Popish Pontifical, you shall see in EcclesiiB 
how they make their holy water j to wit in this dcdicatione. 
sort : / conjure thee, thou creature of water, in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that thou drive the 
Devil out of every comer and hole of tfus Church, and Altar ; so as 
he remcun not within our precincts that are just and righteous. And 
water thus used (as Durandus saith) hath power of j^ rutjomjg 
of its own nature to drive away Devils. If you will diyinorum 
learn to make any more of this popish stuff, you o™*^*^'''*™- 
may go to the very mass-book, and find many good receipts : 
marry if you search Durandus, &c. you shall find abundance.'' — 
Scots. Discov. of Witchcraft, p. 133. 



P. 259. 1. S3. Paul sent fus pertelet or gyrkin to the sick^'] llie 
spelling in the text is that of the Edit. 1535. I do not recollect 
whether by design or accident the latter word was not presented 
in its modern form of jerkin. It may amuse the reader to see 
some of the variations which these words have undergone in the 
successive translations of the New Testament. 

Wickliffe*8 Translation, the Sudaries. He died A. D. 1384. 
Tyndale'H first Edit. (1526) Napkyns or Partlettet. 
Tyndalc's, 1534 and 1536. Coverdale's, 1535. Matthews, 1537. 
Tavcrner'tf, 1539. Coverdale's; 1550. Napkyns or Partelettes. 



NOTES. 645 

P. ^64. 1. 25. The Collects of St. Lawrence, and of St, Stephens 
in our Lady matins.'] 1 have transcribed the two collects from 
the Salisbury Missal. 

The Collect of St. Lawrence. 
" Da nobis quesumus omnipotens deus viciorum nostrorum 
flammas extinguere : qui beato Laurentio tribuisti tormentorum 
suorum incendia superare. Per dominum/' 

77*6 Collect of St. Stephen. 
^ Da nobis quesumus domine imitari quod colimus, ut dicamus 
inimicos diligere ; quia ejus natalicia celebramus qui novit etiam 
pro persecutoribus exorare, dominum nostrum Jesum Christium 
filium tuum. Qui tecum.'* 



P. 965. 1. 29. Boots which doctors of divinity are created in.'] I 
know not when this custom ceased. In a Tract noticed by Mr. 
Brand in his Observations on Popular Antiquities, entitled '* A 
Light shining out of Darkness, or Occasional Queries, &c." 4to. 
16b9, p, 30. is this remark : *' Whether it be not a pretty foun- 
dation for the Oxford Doctors to stand booted and spurred in 
the Act, because there is mention in the Scripture of being shod 
with the preparation of the gospel ?'* 

Boot^ are mentioned by Bale among the paraphernalia to be 
destroyed by the ministry of the two apocalyptic witnesses. 
" And if anye man will hurt them,*' &c. (Rev. xi. 5.) *' If anye 
manne wyll attempte to do them scathe, or presumptuouslye 
seketh by craftie coloures, subtile reasons, and deceytful argu- 
ments, vpon daungers, doubtes, doctours, old customes^ and au- 
thoritie of fathers to hinder their office, blemish theyr message, 
and darken their light, such fyre shal procede out of theyr 
mouthes as shal consume their enemies. The eternall worde of 
the Lord that they shal declare (whyche is the consumyng fyre) 
shal vtterly destroye them, so that nothynge shal be sene of that 
they were afore, neyther cut shoo, nor corde, coule nor gray 
cote, bote nor blacke hode, rocket nor soapier, myter.nor crosier, 
sindale nor frocke, shauen crown nor anointynge. For all these 

VOL. II. 2 N ' 



546 



NOTES. 




are theyr enemyes,*' — Ira. of both Chiir* ^cond part* b, W. 

Alao on cliajj, xvlii. 9. he says, " Specyally shal th«iy be sore dk- 
cmitenleJ with the matter, whycbe haue with ber coniDiltteft 
the whoredom of the spirite by man ye exteme worehippynges 
of drye wafifer cakes, oyles, roodcs, relyqties, litdys, iiiinges^ 
flculles, boneSjChyppeSj oUl ranges, sbowes, feo/as,8purres, hattes^ 
brcches, whodeSj nightcappes, and such like/' — ^Tiiird part, 
51^. B b 5. 

I beg Mr* Hone to accept my sincere thanks for the remainder of 
this Nate, I find it mentioned in an account of Oxfanl University 
Dresses, that " tbe boots were introdiiced by the Benedictines'' 
anciently^ *' they were worn by Masters of Arts at their incep- 
tion y which custom continued till the introduction of the Degree 
of Doctor, when they were used by them, [the Doctors,] and 
the masters wore pan tables or sandals / instead of, as I couceive, 
hoots, which thenceforth appear to have been relinquished by 
the M* As, to the Docton,'' 



P. ^^6. L 11. Pare the crowns and the fingers of i^rnn.l See the 
jK>pish degradation of Dr. John Oistelhme, in Fox, irol. li, p. 108^ 
Edit, 164L " Moreover the bishop scraped the nailesof both 
his Imnds with a peece of glasse, saying. By this scraping we 
take away from thee all power to sacrifice, to consecrate, and 
to blesse, which thou hast received by the annointiog of thy 

hands Then the bishop took the sheeres and began to clip his 

bead, saying in this manner: We cast thee out as an unthaiikfnll 
child of the Lord^s hentage, whereunto thou wast called, and 
take away from thine liead the crowne, which is the royal signe 
of priesthood, through thine own wickednesse and malice." 



F, 9G7, L 91. The lay-jteopk shottld wete what we rfo.] Should 
know as much as we. Tyndale also uses wit and wot for know. 
See pp. 41S« 49L Hacket, ambassador In the low countries, to 

* Oxoniuu, ToT. 1. P' 2K wh«rc the nbove infortnation b rcfemd t& >* 
hiving Wen Jcrivifd from " Wood's Hist, of Oiford." 



NOTES. 547 

Henry VIII. writes to Wolsey respecting the timely " anychyll- 
noent and destrucion of the nywe bokes/* (Tyndale*s translation 
of the Testament) for he considers from many men's words 
that they would fain consent to these new '* eryssyys which 
God defend, for yfif hyt dyd every fooll wold tynck to be a 
doctor." — See Mem. of Tyndale, &c. 



P. 969. 1. 25. Morttiaries.'] A mortuary is so called according to 
Lindwood, '' quia reUnquiiur Ecclesuc pro anima Defuncti /* it is 
commonly defined a gift left by a man at his death, by way of 
recompence for all failures in the payment of tithes or oblations. 
It is called a corse present, because it was offered in behalf of the 
corse or person deceased. The manner of paying the mortuary was 
anciently by leading, driving, or carrying the horse, cow, &c. 
before the corpse of the deceased at his funeral. From whence 
it appears, that the reason of leading horses before the corpse 
at the interment of persons of quality, was designed for a mor- 
tuary, and not so much for any regard to the military character 
of the deceased. 

This payment is of great antiquity ; for in the national council 
of Ensham, held about the year 1006, there is mention made of 
mortuaries, and the time when they were to be paid, in these 
words, as they are translated by Sir Henry Spelman : sed (squii^ 
simum est ut Anima Symbolum Iquam Pecuniam Sepulchralem nunc 
vocant"] semper dependatur cum Sepukhrum sit effosum,^ And 
thus the Symbolum Anima in the Saxon imports an acknowledge- 
ment or consideration paid for the welfare and benefit of the 
soul. But though the time for the payment of this Symbolum 
Anima is stated by the canon, yet the thing was probably left at 
discretion by the English Saxon church. The motive above 
mentioned, seems to have been the first ground of paying mor^ 
tuaries; though afterwards, for the greater security of the person, 
tythes forgotten were thrown into the consideration. After the 
Norman conquest, the circumstances of this payment were fur- 

* Spel. Concil. y.i. p. 517. 
2 N 2 



NOTES. 549 



the bequests of heriots and mortuaries were held to be ne- 
cessary parts in every testament of chattels. Indeed in another 
part of this very treatise (p. 374.) he speaks of a mortuary-lease 
which, as in the present instance, the spiritualty are represented 
as demanding and taking on all occasions. 



P. 270. 1. 4. Bead-roUs. P. 433. 1. 16. Thrust them out of their 
bead-rolls.'] Bead-roll, from the Saxon bede, a prayer and roll. 
A catalogue, or list of benefactors, to be prayed for. 

" I will that myn executrice, at the tyme of the deliuery 
of the foresaid torches, geve unto everyche curat or curatts de- 
putie of the forenamed ix parishes ivd. to thende that my soule, 
and the soules above written may be remembered in their 
parisshe bede-rolle by the whole space of a yere after.** — ^Fabian's 
Will> in Nicolas's Testamenta Vetusta. p. 504. 

" Thomas Trethwiflfe, Esq. in his Will dated the xxth of Sep- 
tember, 15*)28, bequeaths xs. to the intent that his name may be 
put in the bead-roll, and prayed for every Sunday in the pulpit 
by name, as the custom of the country is. ibid. 644. 

'* Fl to the Par. Priest to remember in the pulpit the soul of 
R. Bliet, who gave vLs. viii.d. to the Church works ij.d.** — 
Churchwarden*s Accounts of St. Mary Hill, in the City of 
London^ An. 17 and 19 £dw. IV. 



P. ^70. 1. 9. Pardofiers,'] Sellers of pardons or indulgences. 



-" A gentil Pardoner — 



His wallet lay before him in his lappe» 
Bretful of pardon come from Rome al hote. 
But of his craft, fro Bendke unto Ware, 
Ne was tber swich an other parcUmere. 
For in his male he had a pilwebere,* 
Which, as be saide, was our ladies reil : 



A covering of a pillow. 



NOTES. 



551 



F- 270. 1. 19, Month wine/*.] *' Minnyng Day a, (says Blount j) 
from the Saxon Eeniyiit)e (Lc?» the mind, q. Mynding^ Days, 
Bede. Hist. EccL lib* iv. ca^, 30. Commemomtiotiis I>ies.) 
Bays, which our oucestors called their mo^thes mlndj their 
years mind^ and the like, being the day a whereon their soub, 
(after their death e,) were hail in special re raemb ranee, and 
some office or obsequies said for them j as Obits, Dirg'ea, &c. 
This word is stil! retained in Lancashire, but elsewhere they 
are more commonly called Anniversary days/' 

We rciid in Fabyan's Chronicle that " In 1439, died Sir 
Roberde Chichely, Grocer, and twice Mayor of London, th« 
which wylJed In his testament that upon bis Mynde DatfVi good 
and competent Dyner should be ordayned to xxilij c. pore Men, 
and that of househohiers of the Citee, yf they myght be foundei 
And over that was xx pounde distributed among themr whicb 
was to every Man two pence." 

Fabyan himself, in bis w*ill, gives directions for his month's 
inind r ** At whiche lyme of burying, and also the monethtM 
myjide, I will that myne Execu trice doo cause to be carried 
from London xii newe Torch ea, there being redy made, to burn 
In the tymes of the said burying and Monetkes Minde : and also 
that they do purvay for iiij. Tapers of iii. lb. evry pece^ to 
brenne about the Corpi and Hersc for the foresaid ij* seasons, 
whiche Torches and Tapers to be bestowed as hereafter sbaibe 
devised 5 which iiij. Tapers 1 will be bolden at every tyme by 
foure poore men, to the whiche I will that to everyche of tbeym 
be geven for their labours at either of the saide ii. tymes iirj. <1. 
to as many as been wed did men : and if any of theyra happen 
to be unmarried » than they to have but iij. d, a pece, and in lyke 
maner 1 will that the Torche berers be orderid/' In another 
part of his will he says : " Also I will,' that if I decesse at my 
tenement of Halstedis, that myn Executrice doo purvay ayenst 
my burying competent brede, ale, and cbese, for all comers to 
the parishe churche, and ayenst the Monethes Mynde I will be 
ordeyncd, at the said Church, competent brede, ale, pieces of 
beffc and mo ton, and rost rybbys of beffe, and shalbe thought 
nedeful by the discretion of myn Executrice, for all comers to 
the said obsequy, over and above brede, ale, and chese, for the 



NOTES. 



553 



I 



say for jny aouL That against my MoneikeM Minde^ the candles 
bren before the rude in the Parish Church. Abo that at my 
Monethe's Minde my Executors provide twenty Priests tu sing 
Placebo J Dirige, &,c/ — See Gent, Mag- for r793j vol. btiii. p. 
11£^1. 

In Ireland, " after the day of Interment of a great personage, 
they count four weeks j and that day four weeks, all priestii 
and friars, and all gentry, far and near, are invited to a great feast, 
(usually termed the Month' § Minds) ^^^ preparation to this 
feast are musses> said in all parts of the house at once, for the 
soul of the dc[>arted ; if the room be large, you shall have three 
or four priests together celebrating in the several corners therofj 
the masses done* they proceed to their feasting ; and after all, 
every priest and friar is discharged with his largess*" — Sir 
Henry Piers' Description of West Meath, 168^, in Val lance y's 
CoUectanea de Ilcbus Hibernicis. voL i. p. 126. 

See Brand's Pop. Ant. vol. ii. p, 215* 



P* ^70. 1.14* TreniaU} A trmtal, triginial^ or trkmnal was 
a service of thirty mnssea, reliearsed for thirty days successively 
after the death of the party. It takes its name from the Italian 
trenia^ t flirty, — See Du Cange, in v, Trentale. 

Isabel, Dutchess of York in the 14th century directs by will 
that " on the day of her death » an hundred irentats, and one 
hundred sauters be said for her soul, and that on her burial day 
her best horse ho given for her Mortuary." — Nicohis's Test 
Vet. p. 135. 

" Will of Elizabeth Lady Scrope, of Upsal and Masham, 
widow. 7th, March, 9tb Henry VIIL 1518. My body to be bu- 
ried in the Black Friars in London, beside my lorde my husband 
Thomas Lord Scrope of Upsal 1 and Masliam. I will that live 
trentalls of masses be sung and said for my soul at the place of 
my burial^ and for the soul of my said lard and husband, and of 
Alice his daughter and mine, for Sir Henry VVent worth's soul, 
and for the soul of my lord my father John Mart[uess of Mon- 
tagu, and the Lady Isabel his wife my mother, and for all 
cbrifltian souls/'— Nicolas*a Test, Vet, p» 5S7j B. 



NOTES. 



555 



from Sir Thomns More's Dialogue, tbat the render may form 
some idea of the courtesy of his manner, and the force of 
his arguments in this work against "the pestylent sect of Luther 
and Tyndale, by the tone by gone in Saxony, aod by the tother 
laboryd to be brought into England/' 

"^ Cryste also promised saynt Mary M:^dalene shulde be wor- 
shyped thorow the worlde and hauchere an honoriible remem- 
braunce for tbat she bestowed that precyouse oyntement vppun 
hys holy bed, Whycb thyng whan 1 consyder, it makyth me 
meruayle of the madnes of these heretiques that barke agaynst 
the old aunrient c us tomes of cry sty s chyrcb, mockyng the 
settyng vppe of candellys and wyth fulyshe facecyes and bias-- 
pbemous mockery deniaunde whyther God and hys sayntys lak 
lyght or whyther yt be nyght wyth they in tbat they can not see 
wythoute candle. They myght as well aske what good dyd 
that oyntement to Christ is hed. But the heretyques gruge at 
the coste now, as they re brother Judas dyd than, and say it 
were better spent in almys vppon pore folk. And thys say 
many of theym whyche can neyther fynde in theyre harte to 
spend \7)pon the one nor the tother. And sum spend sometm) e 
vppon the tone for none other en tent but to thend that tbey 
may the more boldely rebuke and rayle agaynste the tother. 
But let them all by that en sample of that holy woman, and by 
those wordy a of our Savyour, lerne that God delyteth to se the 
feruent bete of the hartis deuoiion boyl out by the body. And 
to du him semyse with all such good is of fortune as God hath 
g^vin man, 

" What ryches deuysed our Lord God bymselfe in the making 
and garni sbyng of the temple and m the ornamentes of the 
auter and the preates apparayle, what was himselfe the better 
for all thys ? what for the bestis that hymself commaunded to 
beoflTred hym m sacryfyce } what for the swete odours and frank- 
en sense } why do these heretiques more mocke at the manor of 
chrystis cbyrche than they do at the maner of the J ewes syna- 
goge but yf they be beter J ewes than cry a ten men ? 

" If men wyll stty that the mony were better spent among poo re 
folke by whom he more scttcth> bcyng the quycke temples of 
the holy goslc made by hys ownc band^ than by the temples of 



NOTES. 657 

pore men ; and that where he duyly seeth that such as haue 
theyr purs full of golde geue to the pore not one pece thereof, 
but yf they gyue ought they ransake the botome among all the 
gold to seke out here an halfpeny or in his countrey a bras peny 
wherof four make a ferthing : such goodly causes find they that 
pretend holines for the colour of theyr cloked heresyes.** — Ch. II. 
fol. 7, 8. Edit. 1528. For Tyndale's reply, see vol. iii. p. 87. 

Ibid. Poor find trentals and brotherhoods and begging friars] 
support them by their contributions. " Maister friar hath had 
a trental, and father limitour a bushell of malt or a chyese for 
playnge the knaves also.'* — Bale's Im. of both Church, sign. C. 
3. b. 



P. 286. 1. 14, 15. Bush at a tavern door, wine therein to be 

sold.] The proverb is well known, "Good wine needs no 
bush." In " Greene in Conceipt,*' 4to. 1598, p. 10, we read, 
" Good wine needs no Ivie Btish,** 

'' Like as an Ivy Bush put forth at a Vintrie, is not the cause 
of the wine, but a Signe that wine is to bee sold there.'* — 
Vaughan s Golden Grove, 8vo. Lond. 1608, sign. B. b. b. 

" Box and Ivy last long green, and therefore Vintners make 
their Garlands thereof : though perhaps Ivy is the rather used, 
because of the antipathy between it and wine.*' — Cole's Introd. 
to the Knowledge of Plants, p. 65. 

In " Poor Robin's Perambulation from Saffron Walden to 
Loudon/' July 1678, 4to. Lond. 1678, at p. 16, we read : 

<' Some Alehouses upon the road I saw, 

And some with Bushet, skewing they wine did draw" 

Brand's Obs. on Pop. Antiq. vol. ii. p. 246, 7. 

Here may be inserted a note omitted p. 22. L 34. The alepole,"] 
By the following passage in " Whimsies : or a new Cast 
of Characters," 12mo. Lond. 1631. second part, p. 15, it 
should seem that signs in ale-houses succeeded Birch-poles. 
The author is describing a painter. " He bestowes his 



NOTES. 659 

P. 31^. 1. 10. a make,'] a mate, a wife, husband, &c. 

" Among whose spoilt, great Solyman's fair make, 
With ber deare children we did captire take." 

" There's no goose so gray in the lake. 
That cannot find a gander for her mate.'* 

Lyly's Mother Bombie, iii. 4. 

" And of faire Britomart example take, 
That was as true in lore as turtle to her make." 

Spens. F. Q. III. zi. 2. Narei Glossary. 



P. 315. 1. 3. join them,'] enjoin them. 



P. 319. 1. 14. Offer their feet to be kissed - - - -] I had 
resolved on the omission of this passage, and one or two others 
equally offensive in the present volume ; but I have been in- 
duced to suffer the author's language to appear in the text } 
and now have no other apology to offer to those who may 
justly expect one, than to express my regret that Tyndale should 
have used such expressions ; and that the taste and decbion of 
the literary world, in its present state of refinement, should not 
allow an editor the privilege of a common scavenger in remov* 
ing the filth which past ages have left behind them. As the 
passage remains, 1 cannot but observe, that if the allusion be 
made, as I suppose it is, to a custom originating in the story 
of Pope Joan, I vouch for noticing, as to the truth of the one or 
the other. Mosheim may be consulted (vol. li. pp. 30<>, SOI, 
8vo. ed. 1782.) for a list of authors who have written on both 
sides of the question ; and, for the rest. Bale's Pageant of 
Popes, fol. 57. and " of Dispensations," at the end of the volume, 
ed. 1674. 

It is not, however, to be supposed that Tyndale exceeded 
his contemporaries in the homeliness of his phrases. His 
great antagonist Sir Thomas More, with all his celebrated en- 
dowments, did not only act the buflbon in the arms of death. 



NOTES. 661 

€lestroye theyr ymaginacyons^ and brynge theyr practyses to 
nought, prouynge their tradicyons to be most vyle draffe, and 
most stynkyng dreggs of 8ynne> for so muche as that which 
is not of faiths is sinne.** — Image of both Churches. Sign. E 8. 
" If your canon lawe (wherof ye are a commensed doctour) 
and all the ceremonyes whych ye haue of the pope were 
brought to the tryall of God*8 worde they schuld not onlye 
apere sondrye errours> but also blasphemouse beggerye, detes- 
table lernynge, and abhomynable wytcherye, the pharysees 
leuen, lyes of hypocrites, adders egges, spyders webbes, bryres, 

tares, cocle^ chafife, rust, dust, dregges, dreames, dot« 

tage, dronkennesse, dogges dyrt, swylle, swyiie$ draffe, fylthy- 
nesse^ stubble> snares of enem yes, execrable doctrine of devyls, 
God's curse, and abhomynacyon syttynge in the holye place. 
*' Yet a course at the Romyse Fox." By Johan Harryson (Bale) 
foL 61. Zurik, 1543. The following example is from Bale's 
poem before cited : for I cannot doubt that it is his, when in 
addition to other internal evidence of its being his composition, 
I find in the work just quoted the same phrases as are there 
used : compare fol. 17, " with soche lyke pylde pedlarye and 
Romyshe ware,'* with the beginning of the verses. See note to 
p. 92. L 15. 

THE PAPY8TE. 

<< If thou wylt take the byble boke. 
And upon Saynt James pystle loke, 

Ther you shall, I trowe, se 
How foyth is ther trewly applyed. 
And good workes with him tyed ; 

Se how they do agre." 

THE CHRISTIANE. 

•* Paule only of fayth. 
Of workes, saynt James say th, 
God doth us justifye. 
Before God fayth thanne. 
And workes before manne» 
Concludeth thys controversye. 
Fides sine operibus mortua est. Jaop. n% 
roL. II. 2 o 



£09 NOTES. 

Tlw work Pi lliait you nmkp 

Trew fnylVi do not wake, 

For wliy, the J* are but cUaffe. 

NqUl^ marga^itas poucTc mite porcoA* Mtit* rii. 

Godded word dotU diff/ne 

Tbdt ye nte but swjiic, 

Yjefbdc in iwylle nnd drajt,"" 



P- 339, L I. T% cfiijwie ihe ScripiuTe into four semes, the 
lUtralf tropologkid^ aliegorkalt tmd anagogical^ 1 find that Wick- 
liffe recognizes these four senses in one of his Postils upon the 
go&|}el3 of Sundays, and other festival days | which seemed not 
unworthy of transcription from the MSS. in the British Mu- 
seum, as it serves to shew how deeply rooted, and extensive 
was the evil, which Tyndale so forcibly exposes j and how 
much the cause of biblical science^ as well as of Christian truth 
in general, is indebted to bis honest and zealous labours, 

" Dammica XIlV jmt tmituiem 
Eiierts Jesu^ de Jinibus tirL Mar* 7*- 

*' This gosspel teUeth a miracle of crist to make men to loue 
him nnd trowe in his power. Hou a deef man and doumb was 
helid of crist. Jhu wente out of the contre of tirus> and he 
cam bi sydon to the water of Galile. And he cam.thoru a con- 
tre that men clepen decapolios^ whiche contre conteyneth x 
citees withynne hym. And men of the contre broughten to 
him a deef man and domb man also, and praiden crist to 
putte to him his bond: for thei conceyueden that bi this 
scholde crist fully hele him. And crist took this seek man 
aside fro the peple> and putte his fyngres in to bothe his eris. 
And spittynge, with his fynger crist touchede his tonge. And 
crist lokinge in to heuen with a deolful chere, seide to this 
seek man, be thi wittis openid, and anon weren his eris openid 
for to here, and the bond of his tonge was openid for to speke 
aright. And crist bad this men to publische nought this 
miracle, but euer the more that he bad thus> ever the more thei 
precheden. And ever the more thei wondreden and saiden 




NOTES. 



&S3 



among hem self, that erist hndtle hlane alte Ibiriges wel, ffor 
he mack the dombe men to sj^eke, and deef men to heren 

It is seid comnnely that holy writ hath iiij. untlirstomU 
dingea. The Brst vndirstondingc is plcyn bi kttre of iIil' 
^torte. The seconde vndiratondinge la elejud wit of AUe- 
gorikj whan men vndcratonden the wyt of the lettre : whan 
thing »chal falle here of before the day of dome. The thridde 
vndirstondinge is clepid tropologik^ and it techeth hou men 
scholden lyue here in virtues. The ferthe vndirstondinge ts 
clepid anagogik, and It telleth hou it seha! be with men that 
ben in henene. We scholden knowe the seconncle ivit of this 
gosspelj ffbr it is bileue of cristene men in erthe, we scholden 
bileue that mankynde fel from the staat of innocens for Adamis 
synne and Eve* And Jliu, God and man, bough te mankynde 
fro the fendis prisone as this gosspel telleth. And so our J hu 
wente fro the bosom of the fader of heuene^ for tirus is ma- 
kynge^ and God made of nought bothe aungelis and men and al 
this brode world. He came bi Sidon, that is amigelis kyndc 
whan he gret our lady bi servise of aungelis. And thus aungel 
Giibriel with alle other that stoden heelden pees with God and 
leften the ferste synne. But our Jhu wente out to the water of 
Galile, for he took the staat of man sliden from innocentz. For 
Galile is a wheel whirlinge or pasting. And so dede man- 
kynde after that it hadde synned, Crist cam thoru the contre 
hadde x citeesj for he cam bi alle men that weren bisegid with 
the fend. And thes men ensegid thus ben sille ihes citeeSj and 
mankynde thus ensegid bringeth to Jbii here kynde that was 
deef and domb bi the synne of Adam, ffbr thei leften to here 
god and herde the fend, and troweden to the fendis lore, and 
leften the lore of god. And so weren thei deef to heren of god 
what thei scholden do, Jhu took mankynde that was thus seek, 
not in eche persone, but singulerly in on. And crist put his 
fyngres in eris of this domb man, whan he applied e his virtu, 
sotily worchinge for to teche man how he wente from god. 
And with hia spotele he touchide his tonge whan he ghaf him 
vertu to herie god rightly. And so crist hadde sore we of thes 
two synncsof man, and bad that the bond of his wit scholde be 
open id. But JIiu bad that thei schohlcn not preise him her- 

2o5 



5fi4 



NOTES, 



fore bi hlfi manliccfe. And for this niccknesse thci prekedeti 
him more by his got! bed e, and seiden soth tbat he made alle 
tbinges wdj ffor he made deef men to here and domb men to 
speke, fTor men deef in goddb lore, he made bere wbat god 
apak in bem both in maundementz and in counaeiU And tberby 
tbei lerneden to speke. And ao tbre mlraclis dede crist to 
gidere in satiynge of mankynde. He made men deef bi synne 
to here what god spak in hem ; ami men domb fro rigt specbe 
to i^peke openly goddis la we. And so bi side tbes vertuej, to 
here and to Bpeke god niouede mankynde to do as thei achol- 
den. And so may men see, bo the moche tbey is been to blame, 
that bea domb and deef in this maner of worcbinge/' — Cott. 
MS3. Claudius D, S. fol. 17«- 



P. 339. h 9. dmpohgiat} so printed in Edit lS7S*hiit evidently 
wrong. It is correctly printed in Copland's Edit 156 L and the 
earlier editions, tropo logical. He, however, uses the word 
afterwards {p. 343, 4,) to burlesque the tropological sense of 
Scripture, The phrase to cliop logick, was tn familiar use in 
Tyndale's time?. An instance occurs to my recollection in Sir 
Thomas Morels Dialogue. " A well then quod 1 reason must 
he nedys haue then that shall parceyue what he shulde beleue. 
And so must reson not resyst fayth but walk wyth her, and as 
her handmayd so wayt upon her, that as contrary as ye take her, 
yet of a trouth fayth goth neuer wythout her. But likewise as 
if a mayd be suffred to ronne on the brydle or be cup shoten or 
wax to proude, she will then wax copious and chop logyk wyth 
her mastres, and fare sometyme as she were frantyk, so if 
reason be suflFred to ren out at ryot and wax ouer hye hartyd 
and proude> she wyll not fayle to fall in rebellyon toward her 
mastres fayth. But on the other syde if she be well brought 
up and well gyded and kept in good temper, she shall neuer 
disobey faythe beyng in her right minde. And therefore let 
reason be well gyded, for surely fayth goth neuer wythout her. 
—Sir T. More's Dial. fol. 31. b. Edit. 1528. 




NOTES. 665 

P. 340. Jvisement,'] advisement, counsel. 

" - - - I think there never 

Marriage was managed with a more avisement.'* 

B. Jonson's Tale of a Tub. ii. 1. cited by Mr. Todd. 



P. 347. 1. 25, 27. Homely gest of Noah— jested thereof.'] In 
addition to the note on p. 8, where, by a collection of syno- 
nymous phrases, it appears how frequently I'yndale used the 
word (gest) in the sense ofgestum, a deed, or action, or relation 
of any thing, as in the preceding page, (p. 346', 1. 22. there 
is no story nor gest, &c.) it is worthy of notice here, where 
the word gest and its derivative gested occur with different sig- 
nifications, that in all the early editions they are spelled the 
same (gest and gested -,) although, in conformity with the plan of 
this work, the modern spelling of the latter word is adopted 
in the text. There can be little doubt that the word jest is 
originally the same as gest 3 used at first with greater latitude 
for any tale or story ; and at length confined, after, perhaps, 
passing through various gradations of meaning, to its present 
connection with to what is ludicrous, and intended only to 
excite laughter and merriment 



P. 354. 1. 23. to nosel.'] Written also nousle, nusle, nuzle 3 as 
to noursle, or nursle, to nurse up. 

" Bald friars, and knavish shavelings — sought to nousel the 
common people in ignorance, lest being once acquainted with 
the truth of things, they would in time smell out the untruth 
of their packed pelt and masse-penny religion.** — ^£. K. on 
Spenser s Shep. Cal. June. 

** Those mothers who, to nousle up their babes, 
Thought nought too curious, are ready now 
To eat those little darlings whom they loved.*' 

Shakes. Per. Act I. So. 4. 
See Todd's and Nare's Gloss. Mai. Shakes. Ed. 1821. vol. xxi. p. 50. 

See p. 436. noselling them in ceremonies, &c. 



NOTES. 567 

" What h#re we here ? Hemton hamten ; 
Here will I never more tread nor stampen.'* 

P. 47. fol. ed. 1665. 

From what Tyndale say8> p. 355> and in many other places, 
of the Pope, he would have compared him to Robin Badfellow, 
as readily as to his predecessor, had he been «o early as his 
time brought into notice. An extract of a few lines must 
suffice for him. 

" Twas a mad Robin that did divers prandces, 
For which with some good cheare they gave him thankes. 
And that was all the kindness he expected. 
With gaine (it seems) he was not much infected. 
But as that Time is past, that Robin's gone, 
He and his Night-mates are to us unknowne ^ 
And in the steed of such Good-fellow sprites, 
We meet with Aodtit BadfeUow a nights. 
That enters houses secret in the darke. 
And only comes to pilfer, steale, and sharke; 
And as the one made dishes cleane, (they say) 
The other takes them quite and cleane away.*' 

More Knaves yet. The Knaves of Spades and Diamonds* 
By Samuel Rowlands. See Brand's Obs* on Pop* . 
Ant vol. ii. p. 359. 



P. 364. 1. 27. wkkednm of our tpirits. P. 365, 1. 35. wicked 
tpirUa. P. 378. 28. the doctrine of our spirits.'] May not this 
sense be made the twenty-first in Mr. Todd*s Johnsoa (in V. 
Spirit,) as confining the word to the spiritualty, or ecclesiasr 
tical body ? 

P. 365. 1. 21. Lade the lips of their headmen] Prayer-men.— 
Letters of this period were generally concluded with the ex- 
pression J for instance : — 

Your most humble beideman, 

Thomas Cranmbr. 
Your humble bedeman, 

CUTB. DURBSXK. 

Within a few years of Tyndale*s writing, I find Sir Ralph Shir- 
ley by will dated 10th March, 1513, lading the lips of his bede- 
men with a thousand masses of requiem, and other masses most 



nm 



NOTES, 



cxpedktit and bebavefLil for his sotiVs liealth to be sung and 
said on the day of his burial, and as sooq after as possibly might 
be. And Sir Thomas Wyndham, by his will dated 22nd Oct. 
1591, directing that aa soon as pofisibl^ one thousand masses 
should be said for him in the city of Norwich, and the shire of 
Norfolk, to be parcelled out in this fashion. One hundred in 
the honour of the blessed Trinity ; in honour of the (ive wounds 
of otir Saviour Jesus Christ, one hundred i in the honour of the 
five joys of our blessed Lady, one hundred ; in the honour of 
the nine orders of angels one hundied ; in the honour of the 
patriarchs one hundred j in the hononr of the twelv e Apostles, 
one hundred j in the hononr of all saints, one hundred ; of 
Hequiem one hundred ^ in the honour of St. John the Evan- 
gelist, thirty j in the honour of St* George, forty j in the honour 
St. Thomas of Canterbury, thirty ; in the honour of St, Mar- 
garet, forty ) In the honour of St. Katherine, thirty ; and of 
St, Barbara, thirty i which maketh the nunaber of a thousand 
masses. 



P. 369, 1. 9. Sir John.^ Tlie title of Sir was very early applied 
to aU who had entered into holy orders* Aj the Universities 
Dominm, the academical title of a Bachelor of Arts, was usually 
rendered by Sir in English, in addressing the person in conver* 
sation, or by writing* In the "Letters written by Eminent 
Persons," vol. i* p, 117, Lond, 1813, one to Mr, Hearn^ the 
Antiijuarian, begins, '* Sir Hearn/' and is dated I>ec. 12, I700* 
Archdeacon Nares observes that this title was thus used in 
some colleges, even in his memory* 

Sir John was a general expression for any cumf e, or priest* 
Individuals were designated or adilressed by this title preSxed 
to their names. In the '* Practice of Prelates," Tyndale speaks 
of Sir Tfimnai Hiifon^ a preacher at Maidstone, w here he was 
burned for heresy. An* 1529*— See Fox's Acta and Mon, voL il 
p. 358* ili. 1003* Ed. 164 L 

In answer to Sir Thomas More's enquiry of Humphrey 
Monmouth, committed to the Tower on suspicion of heresy, 
*' What exhibition he gave to any body beyond sea,*' he saidj 
" that in four years past he did give unto a Prieste, miled Sk 



NOTES. 569 

TVilliam Tyndale, otherwye called Ho/cAerw.**— Harleian MSS. N« 
426. fol. 10. 

" And thu8 he said unto us everich on, 
Thb swete preest, this goodly man Sire John," 

Ch. C.T. V. 14825,6. 

" Ser Johan now is holde 
In yche place to scolde, 
Where men do net care 
For pylde popyshe ware. 
He doth them accuaey 
And say they refuse 
The lawes of the Lorde, 
Bryngynge false recorde." 

Anon. See note to p. 338« 

'* Doeth the name make a priest? As maister persone> Sir 
John, or my Lorde byshope. Naye (sayeth our maister 
Christe,) Wo vnto you phariseis that wilbe called maisters^ and 
haue the vayne title of Rabby; he that exalteth hymselfe 
shalbe brought lowe.*' — Gilby's Answer to Gardner^ fol. 198. 

" Else must they haue the name of the beast to be called 
spiritual men, or the holy consecrat numbre, as hys holy father- 
hode 18 called. Or at the least they must haue the numbre of 
his name, which is a note of magnificence and worthines* 
Lesse can they not be called then lordes, so mani as are sworn 
to that spiritual market. The most ragged ronnagate, and idle 
idiote amonge theym, is no lesse then a Syr, which is a Lord in 
the latin, as Syr John, Syr Thomas, Syr William/* — Bale's 
Image of both Churches, second part, sign, k iv. 

^' I will not speake now of them, that beyng not content 
with landes and rentes, do catche into their handes spirituall 
liuinges, as personages and such like, and that vnder the pre- 
tence to make prouision for their houses. What hurt and 
damage this realme of England doth sustaine, by that deuilishe 
kynde of prouision for Gentlemen's houses, Elnightes, and 
Lordes houses, they can tell best that do trauell in the coun- 
treys, and see with their eyes, great parishes, and market 
townes, with innumerable others, to be vtterly destitute of 
God*s word^ and that because that these greedy men have 



ari 

irrmters were sadly compbined of. Take one instance out of 
many, 

•* But, say a Bale, ij. crucll enemiee have my juste labours had 
in that behalfe, of wbotnc the one hathc them falsifyed, the 
other blasphemed. Whiche hath caused me leaue them out 
(his allegations of the Scriptures and doctors) in al that here 
followeth. 

** The printers are the fyrst whose heady hast, negligence, and 
couetousnesse commonly corrupteth al bokes. These haue 
both displased them and also chaunged their numbers to the 
truths derogation what though they had at their handes jj* 
learned correctours which take all paynes possyble to preserue 
them.'' — Pref.to the second part of Im. of both Churches. 

What is the date of that Edition of the Bible which reads in 
Ps. cxix* 16L — Printers have persecuted me without a cause ? 



P. 413. 1. 27- mitk Flatina in the U/e of p&pa.'] " The moat 
considerable of his works, says BaylCt is. The History of the 
Popes, from St, Peter to Sijttus IV, to whom he dedicated it. 
It is variously spoken of: the Protestants like it well enough, 
and have placed the author in the catalogue of the witnesses of 
truth. Some Roman Catholics accuse him of want of sincerjt>» 
and diligence. Nevertheless, Panvinius did not scruple to pub- 
lish that History with notes of his own, and to add to it the 
Lives of the Popes from Sixtus IV. to Plus IV. Cicarella went 
ouj and added to it the Lives of the Popes from Pius V, to Cle- 
ment V[H, 

II lyric us gives this account of the work : " Although Plat inn 
has flattered Ihe Popes in a scandalous and impudent manner r 
nevertheless he is sometimes constrained by their extreme wick- 
edness and cruelty to discover the abominable sins of the 
'* whore of Babylon*'* In the Ufe of Marcellinus, he complains 
that the iniquiticjs of the popes were come to such a height, 
that there was scarce any room left for the mercy of God : that 
their covetousness, pride, neglect of learning, (negkctum dov- 
ifinw) hypocrisy and vices, that even in profligates would be ac- 



573 NOTES* 

counted execrable, were grown m public that tbey seemeil to 
glory in them. In bis Lives of tbe FopeSj after the year one 
tbouAand, he often says thai all piety and holiness waa Bed from 
the popes to the Cssars/* Bayle adds : 'M should wiHinglf 
subscribe to the juilgnient which Robert Crcyghton made upon 
that work of Platina. " PJadna, a dry and barren writer, often 
wants words, often sense, very often experience, and some- 
times integrity. And, which is stiU more to be wondered at 
he has no where blundered more remarkably than in the Life of 
EugGnius^ in whose time be flourished**" The first edition of 
ibis History wai printed at Venice, in 14T9, in folio, and baft 
been several time& printed since in d liferent forms. It has been 
translated into the German^, Italian, and French langUP^es, 

Our author, Bartholomew Platina, wa^ born m the year 1421, 
in a village called Fiadena, between Cremona and Mantua. His 
first profession was that of a aoUIier, which be relinquished for 
that of literature. He died of the plague iu the year 14SI* For 
an account of his imprisonment and suQ^ertngs for his opposition to 
Paul ILt his liberation and appoiatmeot to the office of Library- 
keeper of the Vatican, by Sex t us VL and a complete list of his 
works, the reader is referred to Bayle' s Historical and Critical 
Dictionary! 



P. 433. 1. 20. celarer,'} cellarer, or cellerer. The officer who 
had the care of the provisions. 

** Thou hast a ful faire skin ; 

It is a gentU pasture tber thou gost ; 
Thou art not like a penaunt or a gosU 
Upon my faith thou art som officer, 
Som worthy sextein, or som cclarer" 

Ch. C. T. V. 13938—42. 



P. 438. 1. 6. Rutter^ a horse-soldier, a trooper. 

"Clothed in sacke clothe.** (Rev. xi. 3.) No pompe shal 
apeare in their apparell, no glory of the world in their behauour. 
Neither shal tbey be accompanied wyth a garde of ruffelynge 
rutters. Neither shall they with Annas and Caypbas sit vpon 



NOTES. S74 

l>fe and death. Neyther shall they blesse in the sheate with 
miter^ crosse^ and cope. Neyther claim the higher seats^ in 
side gowns, shauen crowns^ and tippettes. Neither shal ther 
be sacke friars nor Franciscans. They shal not disfigure them- 
selues to seme religious, norsaye longe prayers to appere holi^ 
but in a sober conuersacion auoydynge superfluities they shall 
constantly witnesse the truth of God in the vniuersal worlds to 
his glory and their edification. For sacke clothe in the scrip- 
ture is a sygne of sobrieti^^ sadnes and temperaunce, as in 
Helias and John Baptist/* — Bale's Image of both Churches, 
Part II. sign. B 3. 



P. 446. 1. 18. p. 461. 1. 27. chevisance'\ bargain. *' Old Fr. 
chewsawns, chevissance, an agreement between debtor and cre- 
ditor, relative to the loan of money.'' — Kelham. 
** They maken many a wrong ckevUoMMce, 
Heaping up waves of wealth and woe." 

Spencer Shep. Cal. May .^-Todd's Johnson's Diet 



P. 460. 1. 28. of which he saved the fourth part in the dandiprats]^ 
Dandiprat, a small piece of money, by coining which, Tyndale 
says, twenty- fiveper cent profit accrued to the government. Cam- 
den on Money, in his Remains, says '' King Henry the Seventh 
stamped a small coin called dandiprats : and, first, as I read coined 
shillings, whereas before it was a name of weight rather than 
of coin." The word also means a dwarf. 

'' One of her chaplains, — a very dandiprat, and exceedingly 
deformed.'*— World of Wonders, Edit. 1608. p. 178. See Todd 
and Nares. 

It is a curious coincidence that a few days after writing the 
above, and before the return of the proof to the printer, 1 am 
able to make the following extract from a letter from Constan- 
tinople, dated January 1 1, representing the Sultan, as doing pre- 
cisely that which the Sultan of England did just three centuries 
ago. ** For some time past^ an apprehension has been felt here. 




NOTES, 



B7t 



to the king, printed from the Cotton MSS. VltelL B. % in 
Flddes Coll. p» 7. gives the accouni, that " upon Sundatf lastj a 
greatj most cru€l battle was committed at Novaira/' He 
makes the two bodies of the Swias^ 5,500, and 700O, and the 
French army 8,50O. He say a " the victory of the Swiss is here 
esteemed marvellous noble j but they lost 5000 men. The 
pope hath this night shot a solemn peal of guns in triumph of 
the premises.**^ — See Turner*B Hist* Henry VIIL vol. i- p. 11^-4. 



F. 4R0. ]. 20| ^1. He had learned aho of his necf'mnanc^, that 
ihis would he a jeopardous }fear for hhn* See pp. 411^ 450| 453 j 
{calked nativUkSf) 488^ (the pTognmikation.)'] Tyndale appears 
to have been a believer in judicial astrology, although there is 
no evidence to induce us to conclude that, like Melancthon and 
some other great men of his time, he studied the science, and 
cast nativities himself. He does not appear to discredit the 
revelations of necromancy^ any oiore than Baxter and Hale the 
existence and devilish power of witchcraft, in a later period. 
Having mentioned witchcraft, such is the difficulty of restraining 
oneself in this kind of writings I must cite a curious passage 
from a sermon of Bishop Jewels preached before Elizabeth 
in the year 1558* 

'* And by the way, to touch but a word or two of this matter, 
for that the horrible vsing of your poore subiects infurceth 
thereunto : It may please your Grace to understand, that this 
kind of people, I meane witches and sorcerers^ within these 
few last yeercs, are maruellously increased withtn this your 
Graces real me* These eies haue seene most euident and mani- 
fest markes of their wickednesse. Your Graces subiecls pine 
away euen unto the death, their colour fadeth, their flesh rot- 
teth, their speech is bennmmed, their senses are bereft. 
Wherefore, your poore subiects most humble petition vnto your 
Highnesse, is, that the lawes touching such malefactours, may 
be put in due execution* For the shole of them is great, their 
doings horrible, their malice intoUerable, the examples most 
miserable. And I pray God, they neuer practise further^ than 
vpon the subiect**' Jewell's Sermons, p. 204, Edit. 160^. 




notes; 577 

" Qui bene eonjicel hunc vaiem, 

*' M. Tullius in opere De Divinatione lib. U. scribit Grsecum 
versiculum vulgo jactatum exstare in banc sententiam : Qui 
bene conjiciet, vatem hunc perhibeto optimum. Citat autem eum 
versiculum Plutarchus in libello De Responsis Pytbise : oyiv 
iuca^wv icaXwCi ^v apierov ftdvrtp avtjyopeVKtv if wapoifUa. ]. e. Bene 
conjectans, quern optimum vatem ap})ellavit proverbium, Quan- 
quam hie in Plutarcbo locus mutilus erat et lacer. Attamen 
colligi potest carmen bujusmodi fuisse : 

Mavnc y dpieTOQ, liariQ fUaZtt koXwc. 

Atque ita citat ex Euripide in libro De Defectis Oraculis. 
Citat et M. Tullius libro ad Atticum 7. A te, inquit, exspecto 
fiitura ii&vTiQ y dpitrrop. Huc allusit Theocritus in Piscatoribus, 
»i modo Theocriti sunt ilia : 

- . ......... Ovroc Apurroc* 

VTtrTiv dviipoKpiTaQ b diSaaKoKoQ lore irofS if vWc. 
• .......«••• ,/iem9 

i. e. Somnia conjectat meUut^ guam mente nutgistrm 
Quirrgitur, --. 

Admbnet adagium, futurorum prsescientiam non ^ sortibus 
aut auguriis petendam esse, sed k prudentia. Siquidem qui 
prudentia sit prsditus, is ex pr«teritorum, prsesentiumque con- 
jecturis facile prospiciet, quid sit eventurum. Proinde non in- 
juria scripsit Aristoteles libro Moralium Eudemionim septimo : 
4povt/iwv cdc 9o^v raxitav tlveu t^v fiavruci^v, sac fi6vwv, i. e. Pru- 
dentium atque sapientum hominum celerem esse divinatloneta, et 
horum tantum, Utinam hanc divinandi rationem amplectaren- 
tur principes, quorum hodie bona pars k prognostis et astrologis 
pendet, hominum genere, ut nunc sunt plerique, vano pariter ac 
seditioso, et reipublicse pestilente." — Erasmus. Adag. Oper. 
torn. IL c. 51.5. 

" The world," says Jortin, ^' is now pretty well cured of 
this folly, and Astrology is as poor a trade to live by as Phi^ 
lology'\ I'his is very true. Such changes doth time pro- 
duce. There lived, for instance, in the village where I 
was born, in the weald of Kent, an Astrologer of some 

VOL. II. 2 p 



NOTES. 579 

here be xxv^. as longe as ye maye, and yf ther leue euen 
nowitfbere they shall goo and come w* owte hort or harme.** 

*' And of thes manere ye maye wette all manere of thynges 
that ye dessyre* 

*' Also if ye well wette of a man that purpowsyth hem 
to haue a benefyce or to go to Relygyon> take the letters 
of hes name, and of the beneffece, and of the daye, and 
depart them be xxx. : and yf ther leue euen nowmbere he 
shall spede, and yf ther leue oode he shall not spede, and yf 
there leae ix he shall be relygyous/* — Harleian MSS. No. 424. 
fol. 4. 



P. 481. L 9. The Cardinal - - - high treason was laid to his 
charge."] For an account of the articles exhibited against 
Wolsey, see Collier's Eccl. Hist. Vol. II. p. S8— 43. who con- 
cludes his remarks upon them with the very just observation^ 
that " there was more clamour than proof in the allegations.** 
There are two imperfect copies of the Articles in the Cott 
MSS., the one in Lord Burleigh*s hand, wanting the beginning, 
(Vesp. F. ix. fol. 190.) which the other, (Julius F.vLfoL 31. b.) 
apparently by the intention of Sir Robert Cotton, completes. 



P. 481. 1. 16. -4 Parliament - - - reformation of mortuaries, 
SfcJ] The Notes to this volume have accumulated to such an un- 
expected, and, I fear, unwarrantable extent, thai I am reluctant 
to add one more to the number -, but there is a shade of doubt 
on my mind whether I may not have been rather captious, and 
done Tyndale a slight injustice, in my former remarks on mor- 
tuaries ; and as I am desirous that my theory, which, in some 
degree influences the presumption, that he has unrighteously 
aggravated the conduct of the clergy, or made a hasty and in- 
correct statement, may be regarded no farther than it is sup- 
ported by unquestionable facts, I am induced to resume the 
subject, and venture to trespass a little farther on the reader's 
attention. A few extracts from Mr. Nicholas's valuable Repo- 
sitory of authentic documents, illustrative of the sentiments, 

2 p« 



NOTES. 581 

of Spillesoy, shall have my best horse and my best saddk for a 
mortuary, and in satisfaction of my tithes and oblations for- 
gotten^ or negligently paid by me, or my officers.'^ — p. 136. 

'* Sir John Golafre, Knt. Jan. 19, 1393, bequeaths no mor* 
fuary to the Church, but ' to King Richard, my Lord, my better 
gross horse." — p. 135. 

" Alice, widow of William Wyndesor, Knt. at Upmynster> 
on the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, August 5th, 1400, 
1 Henry IV. to the Church of Upmynster, one of my best oxen 
for a mortuary."— p. 15^. 

" Thomas Beaucham, Earl of Warwick, at Warwick Castle, 
1st of April 1400. To every town whereof I am Xord or 
Patron of the Church xx marks in money, in the name of my 
principal (or mortuary), but if I depart out of this life at 
Warwick, then I desire that the Collegiate Church of our Lady 
there, shall have my best beast.** — p. 153. 

" John Lord Greystock, July 10th, 1434, 14 Henry VI. 
My body to be buried in the Collegiate Church of Greystock, 
to which I bequeath my best horse as a mortuary, and also all 
my habiliments of war, viz. coat armour, penons, gyron, &c.*' 
—p. 230. 

'' Sir John Nevill, Knt. 1449. I bequeath to the same place 
whar my body shall rest for my cors p'sant, a coursour cald 
Lywd Nevill. In Dugdale*s Abstract, vol. i. p. 299. Lidiard 
Nevai."^p. 265. 

" Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, August 9th, 1435. 
To the Collegiate Church of Warwick, an image of our Lady 
in pure gold, there to remain for ever in the name of a heriot.*' 
—p. 231. 

'' Katharine Lady Hastings, 1503. For my mortuary 
bequeath according to my custome.**— -p. 451. 



NOTES. 583 

GKiilfbrd, Knight of the Garter, aad Controller of the Kings 
house, declared in the open parliament, of his fidelity, that he 
and others being executors to Sir William Compton, Knight, 
paid for the probate of his will, to the Cardinal and the Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, a thousand marks sterling. After this 
declaration, were showed so many extortions done by ordina- 
ries for probates of wills, that it were too much to rehearse. 

" ^. The second cause was, the great polling and extreme 
exaction which the spirituall men used, in taking of corps pre- 
sents, or mortuaries ; for the children of the dead should all 
die for hunger, and go a begging, rather than they would of 
charity give to them the silly cow, which the dead man ought, 
[owed] if he had but onely one, such was the charity of them. 

" 3. The third cause was, that priests being surveyors, 
stewards, and officers to Bishops, Abbats, and other spirituall 
Heads, had and occupied farmes, granges, and grasing in every 
countrey, so that the poore husbandmen could have nothing 
but of them, and yet for that they sl]^ould pay deerely. 

" 4. The fourth cause was, that Abbats, Priors, and spiritual 
men kept Tan-houses, and bought and sold wool, cloth, and all 
manner of merchandise, as other temporall merchants did. 

'' 5. The fifth cause was, because the spirituall persons pro* 
moted to great benefices, and having their livings of their 
flock, were lying in the court in Lord's houses, and took all of 
their parishioners, and nothing spent on them all ; so that for 
lack of residence both the poore of the parish lacked refresh- 
ing, and universally all the parishioners lacked preaching and 
true iitstructions of God's word ; to the great perill of their 
souls. 

*' 6. The sixth cause was, because one priest, being little 
learned, had ten or twelve benefices, and was resident on none, 
and many well learned schoUers in the Universitie, which were 
able to preach and teach, had neither benefice nor exhibition. 

*' These things before this time might in no wise be touched, 
nor yet talked of by any man, except he would be made an 
heretike, or lose all that he had : for the bishops were Chan- 
eellors, and had all the rule about the King, so that no one 
durst once presume to attempt any thing contrary to their 
profit or commodity. 



hu 



NOTESi, 



" But now when God had illuminated the eyes erf the king, 
and the time so servet', that men more boldly durst expresse 
>vith voice such grudgei^ m they had long conceived in their 
heart against the clergy j the burgeises of the Pafliament ap' 
painted certains of the Conmnon house, meu learned in ihc 
law, to draw one bill of the probates of TesLanicnt^j another 
for Mortuaries J and the third for non- residence, pluralities^ and 
taking farms by spirituall men. 

''And first, to the bill of Mortuaries being drawnj and being 
also passed the Common hu'jse^ and sent up to the higher^ 
ibe splrituall Lordi^ shewed a faire face, sayings that assuredly 
priests and curates tooke more than tbey should ^ and therefore 
it were well done to take some reasonable order* Thus they 
«pake, because it touched them but little, 

'^ After thiSj within two dayes^ was sent up the second blllt 
concerning probates of Testaments : which bill, because it 
touched their profit somewhat neere, both the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, and all other bishops in generall, began to frowne 
and grunt i inaoiuuch as Doctor John Fisher^ Bishop of Ro- 
chester, standing up in the Parliament chamber, openly pro- 
tested J that such bills were sent up from the Common house, 
tending to no other thing, but to the destruction of the Church: 
which church being downcj the glory, tben^ of the whole king- 
dom (said he,) must needs fall ^ desiring therefore the lords, 
for God's sake, to take example by the kingdome of Bohemia* 
For as it was then with the people there, so now what say the 
Commons here, but, Downe with the Church ? And all this 
(said he) seemeth to be onely for lacke of faith* When these 
words were reported to the Commoaa of the lower house, what 
the bishop had said, m noting all their doings to bee for lacke 
of faith, they tooke the matter grieuously, so to be esteemed 
of the bishop for no better than hereticjues j understanding, 
moreouer, how that he by those slanderous words went about 
to perswade the Lords tempo rail against them, and so to ouer- 
throw the two bills by them passed before, as yee haue heard. 

" Whereupon, after long debate, it was at length agreed by 
the said Commons ; that Thomas Audley, their speaker, with 
thirty of the chiefe of that house, should be sent to the Klug ^ 



1^ 



J. 



NOTES. 



505 



being then in hb palace at WeBtmrnster^ before called Yorke 
Place : where they eloquently declared, what a dishonour to 
the king ami the realnie it was, to say that they which were 
elected for the wisest men of all the shires^ cities, and bo^ 
roughs within the real me of England, should be declared in so 
noble and open presence, to laeke faith j which was equiualent 
to say that they were infidelsi and no Christians^ as ill as 
Turkes or Saracens : so that what paine or study soeuer they 
tooke for the commonwealth, or what acts or lawcs soeuer they 
naade or stablished, should be taken as liiwes n^ade by paininis 
and heathen peoplt?^ and not worthy to bee kept by Christian 
men i wherefore they most humbly besought the king's high- 
nesse to call the said bishop before him, and to cause him to 
speake more discreetly of such a number as were in the Com- 
mon house* 

" The king being not well contented wilh the saying of the 
bishop^ yet gently answered the speaker, and sent him away* 
Who immediately sent for the Archbishop of Canterbury^ and 
ni% other bishops^ and Rochester alsOj signifying unto them 
the grudge of the Commons. 

'* The bishop of Rochester, excusing himself, answered, that he 
in so saying meant onely the doings of the Bohemians to be for 
lack of faith, and not the doing of them that were in the com- 
mon house, which saying was confirmed by the bishops there 
present, which had him in great reputation. And so by thut 
onely saying th« king accepted his excuse, and therefore sent 
word to the commons by Sir William FilzwilHams Knight, 
treasurer of his household. Which blind excuse pleased the 
commons nothing at alL 

** After this, diners assemblies were kept betwecne certaine 
of the Lords and certaine of the Commons, for the bills of the 
probates of Testaments, and Mortuaries, The tennjorakiejaid 
to the spiritual tie their owne lawea and constitutions i and the 
Bpiritualtie sore defended them by prescription and vsage. To 
whom it was thus answered by a gentleman of Graves Inn ; 
The vsage hath euer been of theeues to rob on Shooter's hEl i 

Ergo J is it lawful } With this answer the spiritual 1 men were 
sore^offended, because their doings were called robberies : but 



58t» 



NOTES. 



tbe tem|K>mU wen ttood ttUI by^ their layin^s, insomuch lb at 
^e said Gentleman siiU\ to the Archbishup of Canterbury, that 
both the exaction of probates of Testaments^ and the taking of 
Mortuarieii, as they were usedj were open robbene and theft. 
After long diiputatioHj the temporaU Lords began to leane to 
the Commons : but for nil that thebilb remamed unconduded 
for a tune. 

" It foUowetl shDrtly after in the parliament, that a bill wan 
assented to by thtf Lords of the higher house, and sent downe 
to the Commons in the lower house, and by them aliso with 
mticb labour agreed vnto, of whom the most part were the 
king^'s seruantSi In the Mhieh Bill it was required and fon- 
eluded^ that the king should be released of all such loane of 
jisoney which be had borrowed of his subjects in tbe fifteenth 
yeere of his raigne. The passing of which bill went sore 
ugninst the .stomaeks of the poore Commons : for many rested 
Tpon itj counting and passing it ouer one to another for good 
debt, as if it had beene ready money io their purses- Where- 
fore the kingj to gratifie them againe, granted to them a gene* 
rail pardon uf tdl oftencesj onely certaine great offences and 
debt* excepted. Also he aided them for the redrea^e of their 
griefes against the spiritual tie, and caused the two new bills to 
be made indifferently, both for the pmbates of the Testaments, 
and Mortuaries : which bills were so reasonable, that tbe spi- 
ritual Lords assented to them all, though they were sore 
against their mindes, and in especiall the probate of testaments 
sore displeased the bishops, and the mortuaries sore displeased 
the parsons and vicars. 

" After these acts thus agreed, the Commons make another 
Act for pluralities of Benefices, non-residence, buying and 
selling, and taking of farmes by spirituall persons. Which act 
so displeased the spiritualtie, that the priests railed on the 
Commons of the lower house, and called them beretiques and 
scismaticks : for the which diuers priests were punished. 

'* This act was sore debated aboue in the parliament cham- 
ber, and the lords spirituall would in no wise consent. Where- 
fore the king perceiving the grudge of the Commons, caused 
eight lords and eight of bis commons to meet in the Star 



^ 



^ 



NOTES. 687 

Chamber at oa afternoonc, and there was sore debating of the 
cause> in so much that the temporall lords of the upper house, 
which were there, tooke part with the Commons against the 
spirituall lords, and by force of reason caused them to assent 
to the bill, with a little qualifying. Which bill the next day 
was wholly agreed to in the lords' house, to the great rejoycing 
of the lay people, and to the great displeasure of the spirituall 
persons.*' — Acts and Mon. p. 254, 5. Edit. 1641. 

Collier, who is ever unfriendly to Fox, and loses no oppor- 
tunity of reflecting on him, seems to coincide with this relation 
of the proceedings of parliament ; at least, prefers it to Bur- 
net's, whose history, also, he made it his business to disparage. 
He says, " I have already observed some regulations were 
made in this session concerning Mortuaries ; 'tis said the Lords 
spiritual opposed the passing this bill with a great deal of ve- 
hemence and satyr.* But Fox reports the Bishops much more 
to advantage.^ This historian expressly assures us, that the 
first bUls sent up from the Commons to the Lords were warmly 
contested -, and after a great length of debate, came to nothing. 
Upon this disappointment, two new ones were drawn by the 
king's order, which appeared so reasonable, that the spiritual 
Lords made no difficulty to pass them." — Eccles. Hist. vol. ii. 
p. 47. 

" Mortuaries are taken away, under certain conditions and 
limitations, in Wales, Berwick and Chester, by 21 Hen. VIII. 
(15^9.) cap. 6. sect. 6. 12 Anne, stat. 2. cap. 6. 28 Geo. IL 
cap. 6." 

" It is enacted by 21 Hen. VIII. cap. 6. That all mortuaries* 
or corse presents to parsons of any parish, shall be taken in the 
following manner, unless where by custom less, or none at all 
is due ) viz. for every person who does not leave goods to the 
value of ten marks, nothing; for every person who leaves 
goods to the value of ten marks, and under dOi., Ss. 4d, ; if 
above Wl and under 40/., 6s. Sd, ; if above 402., of what value 
soever they be, 10«., and no more. And no mortuary shall, 

• Bp. Boniet,Hi8t. Retbrm. PtI. p.83. 
" Fox, p. 995. £dit,2. 



568 NOTES, 

ttiroDgiioiit the kin^om, be paid for the death of any feme^ 
eovert ; nor for any child j nor for any ooe of full ag«, ihal is 
not a housekeeper j nor for any way -faring man ; bul Slicb 
way -fan ug man's mortuary shall be paid in the parbh to which 
he belongi. And upon this statute stands the law of mor- 
tuttriea to this day>" — Rees. CycL 



CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS. 

P. 493, 1. 16. For Maefield rmd ]MamGeld 
Ihjd, h 19. For p, 3* read p, UK 



P* 494. L 5, Memoriali of mtUam Tffndale, fire] In answer to 
enquiries after this compilation ^ I must refer to St JameSj the 
fourth chapter, and the fifteenth verse* 



P. 5^1. I. 34. His Treatise of Morals. 
" The philosophers of antiquity, in the absence of superior 
light, consulted with reverence the permanent principles of na- 
ture, which they employed all the powers of reason and elo- 
quence to unfold, to adorn, to enforce -, and thereby formed a 
luminous commentary on the law written on the heart. The vir- 
tue which they inculcated grew out of the stock of human 
nature : it was a warm and living virtue. It was the moral 
man, possessing in every limb and feature, in all its figure and 
movements, the harmony, dignity, and variety which belong to 
the human form : it was an effort of unassisted nature to 
restore that image of God, which sin had mutilated and de- 
faced. Imperfect, as might be expected, their morality was 
^ften erroneous -, but in its great putlines, it had all the sta- 



NOISES, 



&89 



bilityuf the human constitutLDn^ and its funUamental jirinciplea 
were coeval anil coexistent with human nature. There couUl 
be nothing fluctuating and arbitrary in its more weighty de- 
cisions, since it appealed every moment to the tnan mihin the 
breaMt ^ it pretends to nothing more than to give voice and ar -^ 
ticulatlon to the inward sentiments of the heart and conscience* 
echoed to its oracles. This, wrought into different systems, 
and under various modes of illustration, was the general form 
which morality exhibitedi from the creation of the world till 
our time," 

The eloquent writer adds in a note, '* The system which 
founds morality on utility, an utility, let it be always remem- 
bered, confined to the purposes of the present world, issued 
with ill omen from the school of infidelity- It was first 
broached, 1 believcp certainly first brought into general 
notice^ by Mr. Hume, in his Treatise on Morals, which he 
himself pronounced inctrmparablif ihe best he ever wrote. Tt 
was incomparably the beat for his purpose; nor ts it, easy to 
imagine a mind so acute as his did not see the effect it would 
have in setting morality and religion aHoat ^ and substituting 
for the stability of principle, the looseness of speculation und 
opinion p It has since been rendered popular by a succession of 
eminent writers j by one especially, (l doubt not, with inten- 
tions very foreign from those of Mr. Hume,) whose great ser- 
vices to religion, in other respects, prevents me from naming. 
This venerable author, it is probable^ little suspected to what 
lengths the principle would be carried, or to what purposes it 
would be applied in other bands. Had he for seen this, I 
cannot but imagine he would have spared this part of his 
acute speculations/* 

" We have, happily, preserved to us two complete Treatises 
on Morals, in which the authors professed to give us a complete 
■view of our duties j the one composed by the greatest master 
of reason, the other of eloquence, the world ever saw* The 
first of these has distinguished, classified, and arranged the 
elements of social moraUlif, which is all he could reach in the 
absence of revelation, with that acuteness, subtilty, and pre- 
cision for which he was so eminently distinguished* Whoever 




5do 



NOTES, 



atteatiTcly periwes his Treatise, on the Kichomachean Morals 
I meaa, will Gnd n perpetual reference to the lowartl sentimenta 
of the breaat. He buUds every thbf^ on the human constUii- 
tit>n* He all along takes it for granted, that there Is a moral 
unpresB on the mind, to which, without lookm^ abroad^ we 
may safely appeal. In a wor<l, Aristotle never lost the moralist 
in the accountant. He him been styled the Interpreter of 
Nstare, and baa shewn himself a most able commentator on 
the law writ fen on the hearL" 

Let it be admitted that Aristotle makes an appeal to the sen- 
timents of the heart, as the standard by which actions are to 
be weighed, and their qualities determined ; yet can it be main- 
tained, that sueh an innate sense, orsuch a class of principlea^ 
hos ever Wcii clearly recognised in the eitperience of mankind as 
an essential part of the human constitution, whose gnidance 
may be safely trusted, and whose decisions are unvarying and 
jmrautable I Shall we select the philosopher himself, who it 
styled '' a niost able commentator on the law written on the 
heart/* as presenting; a specimen of the contents of its code, 
and the value of its sanctions } Who will ascertain for us the 
objectSf and define the boundary, of his internal illumination } 
In the intellectual region is Goil dethroned ^ and does virtue 
preserve her jurisdiction and authority inviolate? On her 
domain does the sun never go down, on that of the Deity, the 
day-star never appear ? does the Moral Shekinah shed its light 
on time, and involve eternity in deeper darkness -, illustrate the 
wilderness, and obscure paradise ? How does it happen that 
he should possess an intuitive perception of right and wrong 
in human actions, and in his heart and understanding be so 
blinded and alienated from the life of God, as to form no idea 
of him as the Legislator, Ruler, or Judge of the world } that 
the moral impress stamped upon the mind should be legible in 
what relates to man in his individual and social character, and 
bear no traces of the image and superscription of him whose 
work it is -, that the oracle should respond to every call of 
humanity, and not join the music of the spheres in hymning 
the praises of the Almighty Maker of heaven and earth, who 
\$ good to all, and openeth his hand, and satisfieth the desire of 



NOTES. 591 

every living thing, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom^ 
and whose dominion endureth throughout all generations. 

" And, farther, is it possible to conceive, that one whose views 
were bounded solely by this time-state, should have no refer- 
ence, in his estimate of virtue, to the bene6ts which result from 
its exercise ; and, in fact, does he not often inculcate one line 
of conduct in preference to another, because the tendency of 
the one is to produce happiness, the other misery } It is granted, 
that he instructs us to manufacture our stock of happiness 
principally within ourselves, rather than depend for a supply 
on the external goods of fortune, seeing they are less valuable, 
and more precarious and perishable than the possessions of the 
mind. Thus, after all, in my humble opinion, does the appeal 
to the man within the breast, as conducted by this Hierophanta 
m^steriarum moralium, ' the greatest master of reason the world 
ever saw,* begin and end in self-idolatry. The worshipper 
stands not in dread of the Deity. When he enters the chamber 
of imagery, he sees no spectral hand forming mystic characters 
against the wall ; he hears no fore-dooming, appalling voice, 
denouncing Indignation, and Wrath; Tribulation and Anguish, 
upon every soul of man that doeth evil ; but no sooner does the 
incense of adulation ascend from the altar, than he finds the 
god propitious to his desires, and he departs self-commended 
and justified in his own conceit. The judge at whose 
bar he appears, will modify his sentence according to 
the fashions of the country, or manners of the age in which 
the appeal is made. The temple of the Divinity is not 
the house of penitence or prayer j nor the court of the 
Judge the seat of justice and retribution; but both, as 
the changing opinions of the multitude determine, are coii- 
vertible into an exchange of merchandise, a masquerade of 
folly, or a den of thieves.' In fine, it appears to me incon- 

* The reader, if be is so disposed, may alter or extend this sentence to 
an almost indefinite extent ; and be justified by an appeal to tbe page of 
history for the fact, of tbe most grotesque and discordant opinions and 
practices bearing sway over different com nijani ties and countries ; and even 
of the same tribes, or nations, in successive stages of their progression^ 
which have possessed alike the sanction of the moral feeling in their favour. 



Mf 



NOTES 



testible^ that ei'ery system of virtue and morals, of wbich maii 
is tbe sole architect , the Alpha and Omegaj will^ if resolved 
into its primary elements, be foimd to be u. system of private 
con%*enience and advajitage, and erected fiolely on the basis of 
utiUty. *' It ia to put the young and ardent admirer of clas- 
sical literature upon his guard, thai he may be watchful aa to 
the defects of every system but one, and set his eyes fully upon 
the glory of that one, the system revealed to us by God him- 
self, that I have thought it right to present these remarks/" 

I shall only observe, farther, the late Dr* Rennell had the 
honour of flr^t sacrificing Paley to Aristotle, in the mid^t of a 
splendid panegyric on the attributes of this celebrated Treat tae, 
Dr* Gillies, less severe, only requested the poet Gray not ta 
interrupt him with his murmurs, while he, (to use his own 
wor(is in reference to the performances of others,) '^ adorned 
it with all the embroidery of dechimation/' 

But whether this venerable relick be enshrined in gold and 



or ftg&in^t which) if it has at any time remonncraledj yet a ever ff> as to pro- 
duce zny thiug like tiaiforoiity of decLaioaj or a^cemeat, amoag the unlvcr*- 
ial family of mankindi on quest lous the most Interesting aod iiUpDitaal to 
tlieir well-being and liaiipiness. Try the eipcriroeot, thus ; but hoth, a« Ihe 
chan^ijig inclitiatkms a»dl opttilons of th« multitude determinre], are ci>o< 
vertihlc Into an esLchang^ of merchandke, or a hrothel of impurity ; m 
pantheon of iUpf^fbtition, or &n inqnbitiyaof torture ; a den of thteTea, or m 
haunt of the foulest conspirators agaiiist the riglits, freedom, and happioesa 
of maakiad. Aad m thuji f^umming up, allow Paley a word in reply to 
Ariitotk% who has received appUusic sufficient at bis n^xpense. 

*' Aristotle lays down, as a ffrndamental aud self-evident maxim, tbftt 
nature intended barharians to he slaves; aud proeeedift to deduce from tbia 
maxim a trniti of conclusious, calculated to justify the policy which then 
prevailed. And I question whether ibe same roaiim be not still aelf^erldent 
to the company of merchants trading to the coast of Africa. 

*' Nothing ia ao soon made aa & maxim | and It api>eant rroin the 
fxample of Aristotle, that authority and conrenieDce^ edn cation, prejudice, 
aud general practice, have no small share in the making of tbcm ; and that 
the laws of custom are very apt to he miaUken for the order of nature^ 

" For which rcaJion] 1 suspect, that a sy^iteEia of morality^ huilt upon 
'nstiucts, will only find out realms aod excusea for opinioui and pracllcea 
already esiahlisbed — will seldom correct or refoni] either.'* — Paley*a Moral 
Philosophy, 



NOTES. 593 

precious stones, or exhibited in glittering tinsel, I niust> as a 
Protestant, ^iMihold my devotion^ until I am convinced of the 
justice of its claims to my reverence and homage. — See Hall's 
Sentiments, proper to the Present Crisis. RenneU's Benevolenpe 
exclusively an Evangelical Virtue. Dr. Gregory's Mem. of 
Dr. Mason Good^ p. 175. 



P. 522. 1. 1. For speculations read speculation. 



P. 632. 1.16. fVant of time.'] Although I was pressed for 
time when under the necessity of sending that sheet to the 
press, yet on the whole, I hope I have not been culpably indili- 
gent : and to seek refuge in so vain a shadow of an excuse for 
the imperfection of these appended Notes^ would be the dotage 
of pusillanimity. The truth is, the writing of them was not 
originally contemplated, and the printing of the Volume was 
far advanced when the resolution was formed, and the attempt 
made, to redeem the interval which remained of the time an- 
nounced for its publication. I shall regret exceedingly, how- 
ever, if the impartial critic be constrained to adopt the language 
of the Saintly Martyrologist in reference to the first English 
Edition of his Acts and Monuments, that the materials were 
" hastily rashed up :*' not raked up, as in the Edition of 1684, 
commonly called the best, but certainly far from being the most 
correct. 



P. 535. last line, /or 58, read 33. 



P. 538. 1. 2. Robert Langland somewhere says,] I had written 
Tyndale, but not finding a passage of this kind in his works, 
and the following occurring in the Visions of Piers Plouhman, 
ascribed to Robert Langlund, written in, or immediately after 

VOL. If. 2 Q 



594 



NOTES. 



the year 156^, it is most likely that this is the auiUorlty od 
which I depended. 

" For, wliUij Fortune ib tliy Tread, freres woII^el the lovye. 
And f^atne the in here fraterQite, and for the by scche 
To here pnour prov^iDCial, hus pttrdoii to h&re. 
And praye for ye pol by pol, yf you be pecttrtim."* 

Par. ^Fqt, na long as Fortune isi ihy frieodj t!ie friars wil! loTie thecj and 
mcorporate tliee ioto tbeir brotbcrhood, aftd besceeb tbeir provincial prior, 
thai ibou may est hare his pardon * besid'^ which tbey will otkt and all pray 
for tbtfo* If tboii be only ptcvniMU*. p, 20L 



P, 508. h 24. fan^ef, so in Gilby ; but, query, if it should not 
hsfebeen kandes* 

R 534» L 6. for cerimoniarum, read cercmoniaram, 

P, 565. L 19. /or with to what, re^ef with what. 

P, 576. L 7. after Edward the Vlih, and before was, insert to 
this scleiice. 

IbitI, L 13* for where he, read where, however, he. 



P. 592* L 7- note. Pantheon of nupersiUhn.^ At the last hour 
before this sheet in printed, a strikiner illustration of this part 
of the sentence presents itself, in the words of an excellent and 
zealous prelate, delivered May 6, at the Annual Meeting of the 
Church Missionary Society. " They were engaged," said the 
Bishop of Winchester, " in the glorious work of promoting 
the salvation of the world ; and, with the prayers of the 
righteous, must be successful in such a cause. In some recent 
letters of one of the greatest ornaments to his church, might 
be found passages which would have the effect of increasing 
their ardour for proselytizing in India, if it wanted any addi- 
tional inducement. He alluded to the late Bishop Heber, — a 
divine snatched away too soon from the scene of his labours ; 
too soon for the interest of the Christian world, although not 
too soon for himself. The Hindoos he represented to be 
vicious by the operation of their religion. They were taught 




NOTES. 595 

crime from principle, and had been brought up in the worst of 
all religions. They shed blood without the slightest repugnance^ 
were incapable of sympathy for any one not belonging to their 
own caste, and had been perverted to the most hateful abomi- 
nations by a system of degrading and unnatural superstitions. 
He would ask. Whether there could be a stronger motive for 
eradicating Indian idolatry ?" — As reported in the Times. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 



B. BEN8L£T, PRiNTLMj AN DOVER. 



?/ 



Ifc 



s 



x> 




^^W- 



iL^.V^ 




hi 



1 



\ 



t^ 



l^ 



0s 


